Machine learning
Machine learning (ML) is a field of study in artificial intelligence concerned with the
development and study of statistical algorithms that can learn from data and generalise to unseen
data, and thus perform tasks without explicit instructions.
[1] Within a subdiscipline in machine
learning, advances in the field of deep learning have allowed neural networks, a class of statistical
algorithms, to surpass many previous machine learning approaches in performance.
ML finds application in many fields, including natural language processing, computer vision,
speech recognition, email filtering, agriculture, and medicine. The application of ML to business
problems is known as predictive analytics.
Statistics and mathematical optimisation (mathematical programming) methods comprise the
foundations of machine learning. Data mining is a related field of study, focusing on exploratory
data analysis (EDA) via unsupervised learning.
[3][4]
From a theoretical viewpoint, probably approximately correct learning provides a mathematical
and statistical framework for describing machine learning. Most traditional machine learning and
deep learning algorithms can be described as empirical risk minimisation under this framework.
The term machine learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel, an IBM employee and pioneer
in the field of computer gaming and artificial intelligence.
[5][6] The synonym self-teaching
computers was also used in this time period.[7][8]
The earliest machine learning program was introduced in the 1950s when Arthur Samuel invented
a computer program that calculated the winning chance in checkers for each side, but the history
of machine learning roots back to decades of human desire and effort to study human cognitive
processes.[9]
In 1949, Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb published the book The Organization of
Behavior, in which he introduced a theoretical neural structure formed by certain interactions
among nerve cells.
[10] Hebb's model of neurons interacting with one another set a groundwork for
how AIs and machine learning algorithms work under nodes, or artificial neurons used by
computers to communicate data.[9] Other researchers who have studied human cognitive systems
contributed to the modern machine learning technologies as well, including logician Walter Pitts
and Warren McCulloch, who proposed the early mathematical models of neural networks to come
up with algorithms that mirror human thought processes.[9]
By the early 1960s, an experimental "learning machine" with punched tape memory, called
Cybertron, had been developed by Raytheon Company to analyse sonar signals,
electrocardiograms, and speech patterns using rudimentary reinforcement learning. It was
repetitively "trained" by a human operator/teacher to recognise patterns and equipped with a
"goof" button to cause it to reevaluate incorrect decisions.[11] A representative book on research
into machine learning during the 1960s was Nils Nilsson's book on Learning Machines, dealing
mostly with machine learning for pattern classification.[12]
Interest related to pattern recognition
History
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 1/40
Deep learning is a subset of machine
learning, which is itself a subset of
artificial intelligence.
[20]
continued into the 1970s, as described by Duda and Hart in 1973.[13]
In 1981, a report was given on
using teaching strategies so that an artificial neural network learns to recognise 40 characters (26
letters, 10 digits, and 4 special symbols) from a computer terminal.[14]
Tom M. Mitchell provided a widely quoted, more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the
machine learning field: "A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to
some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by
P, improves with experience E."[15] This definition of the tasks in which machine learning is
concerned offers a fundamentally operational definition rather than defining the field in cognitive
terms. This follows Alan Turing's proposal in his paper "Computing Machinery and Intelligence",
in which the question, "Can machines think?", is replaced with the question, "Can machines do
what we (as thinking entities) can do?".[16]
Modern-day Machine Learning algorithms are broken into 3 algorithm types: Supervised Learning
Algorithms, Unsupervised Learning Algorithms, and Reinforcement Learning Algorithms.[17]
Current Supervised Learning Algorithms have objectives of classification and regression.
Current Unsupervised Learning Algorithms have objectives of clustering, dimensionality
reduction, and association rule.
Current Reinforcement Learning Algorithms focus on decisions that must be made with respect
to some previous, unknown time and are broken down to either be studies of model-based
methods or model-free methods.
In 2014 Ian Goodfellow and others introduced generative adversarial networks (GANs) with
realistic data synthesis.[18] By 2016 AlphaGo obtained victory against top human players using
reinforcement learning techniques.[19]
As a scientific endeavour, machine learning grew out of the
quest for artificial intelligence (AI). In the early days of AI
as an academic discipline, some researchers were
interested in having machines learn from data. They
attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic
methods, as well as what were then termed "neural
networks"; these were mostly perceptrons and other
models that were later found to be reinventions of the
generalised linear models of statistics.[21] Probabilistic
reasoning was also employed, especially in automated
medical diagnosis.
[22]:488
However, an increasing emphasis on the logical,
knowledge-based approach caused a rift between AI and
machine learning. Probabilistic systems were plagued by
theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and
representation.[22]:488 By 1980, expert systems had come
to dominate AI, and statistics was out of favour.[23] Work on symbolic/knowledge-based learning
Relationships to other fields
Artificial intelligence
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 2/40
did continue within AI, leading to inductive logic programming(ILP), but the more statistical line
of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in pattern recognition and information
retrieval.
[22]:708–710,755 Neural networks research had been abandoned by AI and computer
science around the same time. This line, too, was continued outside the AI/CS field, as
"connectionism", by researchers from other disciplines, including John Hopfield, David
Rumelhart, and Geoffrey Hinton. Their main success came in the mid-1980s with the reinvention
of backpropagation.
[22]:25
Machine learning (ML), reorganised and recognised as its own field, started to flourish in the
1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving artificial intelligence to tackling solvable problems
of a practical nature. It shifted focus away from the symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI,
and toward methods and models borrowed from statistics, fuzzy logic, and probability theory.
[23]
There is a close connection between machine learning and compression. A system that predicts the
posterior probabilities of a sequence given its entire history can be used for optimal data
compression (by using arithmetic coding on the output distribution). Conversely, an optimal
compressor can be used for prediction (by finding the symbol that compresses best, given the
previous history). This equivalence has been used as a justification for using data compression as a
benchmark for "general intelligence".[24][25][26]
An alternative view can show compression algorithms implicitly map strings into implicit feature
space vectors, and compression-based similarity measures compute similarity within these feature
spaces. For each compressor C(.) we define an associated vector space ℵ, such that C(.) maps an
input string x, corresponding to the vector norm ||~x||. An exhaustive examination of the feature
spaces underlying all compression algorithms is precluded by space; instead, feature vectors
chooses to examine three representative lossless compression methods, LZW, LZ77, and PPM.[27]
According to AIXI theory, a connection more directly explained in Hutter Prize, the best possible
compression of x is the smallest possible software that generates x. For example, in that model, a
zip file's compressed size includes both the zip file and the unzipping software, since you can not
unzip it without both, but there may be an even smaller combined form.
Examples of AI-powered audio/video compression software include NVIDIA Maxine, AIVC.[28]
Examples of software that can perform AI-powered image compression include OpenCV,
TensorFlow, MATLAB's Image Processing Toolbox (IPT) and High-Fidelity Generative Image
Compression.[29]
In unsupervised machine learning, k-means clustering can be utilized to compress data by
grouping similar data points into clusters. This technique simplifies handling extensive datasets
that lack predefined labels and finds widespread use in fields such as image compression.
[30]
Data compression aims to reduce the size of data files, enhancing storage efficiency and speeding
up data transmission. K-means clustering, an unsupervised machine learning algorithm, is
employed to partition a dataset into a specified number of clusters, k, each represented by the
centroid of its points. This process condenses extensive datasets into a more compact set of
representative points. Particularly beneficial in image and signal processing, k-means clustering
Data compression
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 3/40
aids in data reduction by replacing groups of data points with their centroids, thereby preserving
the core information of the original data while significantly decreasing the required storage
space.[31]
Large language models (LLMs) are also efficient lossless data compressors on some data sets, as
demonstrated by DeepMind's research with the Chinchilla 70B model. Developed by DeepMind,
Chinchilla 70B effectively compressed data, outperforming conventional methods such as Portable
Network Graphics (PNG) for images and Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC) for audio. It achieved
compression of image and audio data to 43.4% and 16.4% of their original sizes, respectively. There
is, however, some reason to be concerned that the data set used for testing overlaps the LLM
training data set, making it possible that the Chinchilla 70B model is only an efficient compression
tool on data it has already been trained on.[32][33]
Machine learning and data mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but
while machine learning focuses on prediction, based on known properties learned from the
training data, data mining focuses on the discovery of (previously) unknown properties in the data
(this is the analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases). Data mining uses many machine
learning methods, but with different goals; on the other hand, machine learning also employs data
mining methods as "unsupervised learning" or as a preprocessing step to improve learner
accuracy. Much of the confusion between these two research communities (which do often have
separate conferences and separate journals, ECML PKDD being a major exception) comes from the
basic assumptions they work with: in machine learning, performance is usually evaluated with
respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and data
mining (KDD) the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge. Evaluated with
respect to known knowledge, an uninformed (unsupervised) method will easily be outperformed
by other supervised methods, while in a typical KDD task, supervised methods cannot be used due
to the unavailability of training data.
Machine learning also has intimate ties to optimisation: Many learning problems are formulated as
minimisation of some loss function on a training set of examples. Loss functions express the
discrepancy between the predictions of the model being trained and the actual problem instances
(for example, in classification, one wants to assign a label to instances, and models are trained to
correctly predict the preassigned labels of a set of examples).[34]
Characterizing the generalisation of various learning algorithms is an active topic of current
research, especially for deep learning algorithms.
Machine learning and statistics are closely related fields in terms of methods, but distinct in their
principal goal: statistics draws population inferences from a sample, while machine learning finds
generalisable predictive patterns.[35]
Conventional statistical analyses require the a priori selection of a model most suitable for the
study data set. In addition, only significant or theoretically relevant variables based on previous
experience are included for analysis. In contrast, machine learning is not built on a pre-structured
Data mining
Generalization
Statistics
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 4/40
model; rather, the data shape the model by detecting underlying patterns. The more variables
(input) used to train the model, the more accurate the ultimate model will be.[36]
Leo Breiman distinguished two statistical modelling paradigms: data model and algorithmic
model,[37] wherein "algorithmic model" means more or less the machine learning algorithms like
Random Forest.
Some statisticians have adopted methods from machine learning, leading to a combined field that
they call statistical learning.
[38]
Analytical and computational techniques derived from deep-rooted physics of disordered systems
can be extended to large-scale problems, including machine learning, e.g., to analyse the weight
space of deep neural networks.
[39] Statistical physics is thus finding applications in the area of
medical diagnostics.
[40]
A core objective of a learner is to generalise from its experience.[2][41] Generalization in this
context is the ability of a learning machine to perform accurately on new, unseen examples/tasks
after having experienced a learning data set. The training examples come from some generally
unknown probability distribution (considered representative of the space of occurrences) and the
learner has to build a general model about this space that enables it to produce sufficiently
accurate predictions in new cases.
The computational analysis of machine learning algorithms and their performance is a branch of
theoretical computer science known as computational learning theory via the probably
approximately correct learning model. Because training sets are finite and the future is uncertain,
learning theory usually does not yield guarantees of the performance of algorithms. Instead,
probabilistic bounds on the performance are quite common. The bias–variance decomposition is
one way to quantify generalisation error.
For the best performance in the context of generalisation, the complexity of the hypothesis should
match the complexity of the function underlying the data. If the hypothesis is less complex than the
function, then the model has underfitted the data. If the complexity of the model is increased in
response, then the training error decreases. But if the hypothesis is too complex, then the model is
subject to overfitting and generalisation will be poorer.[42]
In addition to performance bounds, learning theorists study the time complexity and feasibility of
learning. In computational learning theory, a computation is considered feasible if it can be done
in polynomial time. There are two kinds of time complexity results: Positive results show that a
certain class of functions can be learned in polynomial time. Negative results show that certain
classes cannot be learned in polynomial time.
Statistical physics
Theory
Approaches
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 5/40
In supervised learning, the training data is labelled with
the expected answers, while in unsupervised learning,
the model identifies patterns or structures in unlabelled
data.
A support-vector machine is a supervised
learning model that divides the data into
regions separated by a linear boundary.
Here, the linear boundary divides the
black circles from the white.
Machine learning approaches are traditionally
divided into three broad categories, which
correspond to learning paradigms, depending
on the nature of the "signal" or "feedback"
available to the learning system:
Supervised learning: The computer is
presented with example inputs and their
desired outputs, given by a "teacher", and
the goal is to learn a general rule that maps
inputs to outputs.
Unsupervised learning: No labels are given
to the learning algorithm, leaving it on its
own to find structure in its input.
Unsupervised learning can be a goal in itself (discovering hidden patterns in data) or a means
towards an end (feature learning).
Reinforcement learning: A computer program interacts with a dynamic environment in which it
must perform a certain goal (such as driving a vehicle or playing a game against an opponent).
As it navigates its problem space, the program is provided feedback that's analogous to
rewards, which it tries to maximise.[2]
Although each algorithm has advantages and limitations, no single algorithm works for all
problems.[43][44][45]
Supervised learning algorithms build a mathematical
model of a set of data that contains both the inputs and the
desired outputs.[46] The data, known as training data,
consists of a set of training examples. Each training
example has one or more inputs and the desired output,
also known as a supervisory signal. In the mathematical
model, each training example is represented by an array or
vector, sometimes called a feature vector, and the training
data is represented by a matrix. Through iterative
optimisation of an objective function, supervised learning
algorithms learn a function that can be used to predict the
output associated with new inputs.[47] An optimal function
allows the algorithm to correctly determine the output for
inputs that were not a part of the training data. An
algorithm that improves the accuracy of its outputs or
predictions over time is said to have learned to perform
that task.[15]
Types of supervised-learning algorithms include active
learning, classification and regression.
[48] Classification algorithms are used when the outputs are
restricted to a limited set of values, while regression algorithms are used when the outputs can take
any numerical value within a range. For example, in a classification algorithm that filters emails,
the input is an incoming email, and the output is the folder in which to file the email. In contrast,
regression is used for tasks such as predicting a person's height based on factors like age and
genetics or forecasting future temperatures based on historical data.[49]
Supervised learning
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 6/40
Similarity learning is an area of supervised machine learning closely related to regression and
classification, but the goal is to learn from examples using a similarity function that measures how
similar or related two objects are. It has applications in ranking, recommendation systems, visual
identity tracking, face verification, and speaker verification.
Unsupervised learning algorithms find structures in data that has not been labelled, classified or
categorised. Instead of responding to feedback, unsupervised learning algorithms identify
commonalities in the data and react based on the presence or absence of such commonalities in
each new piece of data. Central applications of unsupervised machine learning include clustering,
dimensionality reduction,
[4]
 and density estimation.
[50]
Cluster analysis is the assignment of a set of observations into subsets (called clusters) so that
observations within the same cluster are similar according to one or more predesignated criteria,
while observations drawn from different clusters are dissimilar. Different clustering techniques
make different assumptions on the structure of the data, often defined by some similarity metric
and evaluated, for example, by internal compactness, or the similarity between members of the
same cluster, and separation, the difference between clusters. Other methods are based on
estimated density and graph connectivity.
A special type of unsupervised learning called, self-supervised learning involves training a model
by generating the supervisory signal from the data itself.[51][52]
Semi-supervised learning falls between unsupervised learning (without any labelled training data)
and supervised learning (with completely labelled training data). Some of the training examples
are missing training labels, yet many machine-learning researchers have found that unlabelled
data, when used in conjunction with a small amount of labelled data, can produce a considerable
improvement in learning accuracy.
In weakly supervised learning, the training labels are noisy, limited, or imprecise; however, these
labels are often cheaper to obtain, resulting in larger effective training sets.[53]
Reinforcement learning is an area of machine learning concerned with how software agents ought
to take actions in an environment to maximise some notion of cumulative reward. Due to its
generality, the field is studied in many other disciplines, such as game theory, control theory,
operations research, information theory, simulation-based optimisation, multi-agent systems,
swarm intelligence, statistics and genetic algorithms. In reinforcement learning, the environment
is typically represented as a Markov decision process (MDP). Many reinforcement learning
algorithms use dynamic programming techniques.[54] Reinforcement learning algorithms do not
assume knowledge of an exact mathematical model of the MDP and are used when exact models
are infeasible. Reinforcement learning algorithms are used in autonomous vehicles or in learning
to play a game against a human opponent.
Unsupervised learning
Semi-supervised learning
Reinforcement learning
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 7/40
In reinforcement learning, an agent takes
actions in an environment: these produce
a reward and/or a representation of the
state, which is fed back to the agent.
Dimensionality reduction is a process of reducing the
number of random variables under consideration by
obtaining a set of principal variables.
[55]
In other words, it
is a process of reducing the dimension of the feature set,
also called the "number of features". Most of the
dimensionality reduction techniques can be considered as
either feature elimination or extraction. One of the popular
methods of dimensionality reduction is principal
component analysis (PCA). PCA involves changing higherdimensional data (e.g., 3D) to a smaller space (e.g., 2D).
The manifold hypothesis proposes that high-dimensional
data sets lie along low-dimensional manifolds, and many
dimensionality reduction techniques make this
assumption, leading to the areas of manifold learning and
manifold regularisation.
Other approaches have been developed which do not fit neatly into this three-fold categorisation,
and sometimes more than one is used by the same machine learning system. For example, topic
modelling, meta-learning.
[56]
Self-learning, as a machine learning paradigm, was introduced in 1982 along with a neural network
capable of self-learning, named crossbar adaptive array (CAA).[57][58]
It gives a solution to the
problem learning without any external reward, by introducing emotion as an internal reward.
Emotion is used as a state evaluation of a self-learning agent. The CAA self-learning algorithm
computes, in a crossbar fashion, both decisions about actions and emotions (feelings) about
consequence situations. The system is driven by the interaction between cognition and
emotion.[59] The self-learning algorithm updates a memory matrix W =||w(a,s)|| such that in each
iteration executes the following machine learning routine:
1. in situation s act a
2. receive a consequence situation s'
3. compute emotion of being in the consequence situation v(s')
4. update crossbar memory w'(a,s) = w(a,s) + v(s')
It is a system with only one input, situation, and only one output, action (or behaviour) a. There is
neither a separate reinforcement input nor an advice input from the environment. The
backpropagated value (secondary reinforcement) is the emotion toward the consequence situation.
The CAA exists in two environments, one is the behavioural environment where it behaves, and the
other is the genetic environment, wherefrom it initially and only once receives initial emotions
about situations to be encountered in the behavioural environment. After receiving the genome
(species) vector from the genetic environment, the CAA learns a goal-seeking behaviour in an
environment that contains both desirable and undesirable situations.[60]
Dimensionality reduction
Other types
Self-learning
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 8/40
Several learning algorithms aim at discovering better representations of the inputs provided during
training.[61] Classic examples include principal component analysis and cluster analysis. Feature
learning algorithms, also called representation learning algorithms, often attempt to preserve the
information in their input but also transform it in a way that makes it useful, often as a preprocessing step before performing classification or predictions. This technique allows
reconstruction of the inputs coming from the unknown data-generating distribution, while not
being necessarily faithful to configurations that are implausible under that distribution. This
replaces manual feature engineering, and allows a machine to both learn the features and use them
to perform a specific task.
Feature learning can be either supervised or unsupervised. In supervised feature learning, features
are learned using labelled input data. Examples include artificial neural networks, multilayer
perceptrons, and supervised dictionary learning. In unsupervised feature learning, features are
learned with unlabelled input data. Examples include dictionary learning, independent component
analysis, autoencoders, matrix factorisation[62]
 and various forms of clustering.
[63][64][65]
Manifold learning algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the learned representation
is low-dimensional. Sparse coding algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the
learned representation is sparse, meaning that the mathematical model has many zeros.
Multilinear subspace learning algorithms aim to learn low-dimensional representations directly
from tensor representations for multidimensional data, without reshaping them into higherdimensional vectors.[66] Deep learning algorithms discover multiple levels of representation, or a
hierarchy of features, with higher-level, more abstract features defined in terms of (or generating)
lower-level features. It has been argued that an intelligent machine learns a representation that
disentangles the underlying factors of variation that explain the observed data.[67]
Feature learning is motivated by the fact that machine learning tasks such as classification often
require input that is mathematically and computationally convenient to process. However, realworld data such as images, video, and sensory data have not yielded attempts to algorithmically
define specific features. An alternative is to discover such features or representations through
examination, without relying on explicit algorithms.
Sparse dictionary learning is a feature learning method where a training example is represented as
a linear combination of basis functions and assumed to be a sparse matrix. The method is strongly
NP-hard and difficult to solve approximately.[68] A popular heuristic method for sparse dictionary
learning is the k-SVD algorithm. Sparse dictionary learning has been applied in several contexts. In
classification, the problem is to determine the class to which a previously unseen training example
belongs. For a dictionary where each class has already been built, a new training example is
associated with the class that is best sparsely represented by the corresponding dictionary. Sparse
dictionary learning has also been applied in image denoising. The key idea is that a clean image
patch can be sparsely represented by an image dictionary, but the noise cannot.[69]
In data mining, anomaly detection, also known as outlier detection, is the identification of rare
items, events or observations that raise suspicions by differing significantly from the majority of
the data.[70] Typically, the anomalous items represent an issue such as bank fraud, a structural
Feature learning
Sparse dictionary learning
Anomaly detection
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 9/40
defect, medical problems or errors in a text. Anomalies are referred to as outliers, novelties, noise,
deviations and exceptions.[71]
In particular, in the context of abuse and network intrusion detection, the interesting objects are
often not rare, but unexpected bursts of inactivity. This pattern does not adhere to the common
statistical definition of an outlier as a rare object. Many outlier detection methods (in particular,
unsupervised algorithms) will fail on such data unless aggregated appropriately. Instead, a cluster
analysis algorithm may be able to detect the micro-clusters formed by these patterns.[72]
Three broad categories of anomaly detection techniques exist.[73] Unsupervised anomaly detection
techniques detect anomalies in an unlabelled test data set under the assumption that the majority
of the instances in the data set are normal, by looking for instances that seem to fit the least to the
remainder of the data set. Supervised anomaly detection techniques require a data set that has
been labelled as "normal" and "abnormal" and involves training a classifier (the key difference
from many other statistical classification problems is the inherently unbalanced nature of outlier
detection). Semi-supervised anomaly detection techniques construct a model representing normal
behaviour from a given normal training data set and then test the likelihood of a test instance
being generated by the model.
Robot learning is inspired by a multitude of machine learning methods, starting from supervised
learning, reinforcement learning,[74][75]
 and finally meta-learning (e.g. MAML).
Association rule learning is a rule-based machine learning method for discovering relationships
between variables in large databases. It is intended to identify strong rules discovered in databases
using some measure of "interestingness".[76]
Rule-based machine learning is a general term for any machine learning method that identifies,
learns, or evolves "rules" to store, manipulate or apply knowledge. The defining characteristic of a
rule-based machine learning algorithm is the identification and utilisation of a set of relational
rules that collectively represent the knowledge captured by the system. This is in contrast to other
machine learning algorithms that commonly identify a singular model that can be universally
applied to any instance in order to make a prediction.[77] Rule-based machine learning approaches
include learning classifier systems, association rule learning, and artificial immune systems.
Based on the concept of strong rules, Rakesh Agrawal, Tomasz Imieliński and Arun Swami
introduced association rules for discovering regularities between products in large-scale
transaction data recorded by point-of-sale (POS) systems in supermarkets.[78] For example, the
rule found in the sales data of a supermarket would indicate that
if a customer buys onions and potatoes together, they are likely to also buy hamburger meat. Such
information can be used as the basis for decisions about marketing activities such as promotional
pricing or product placements. In addition to market basket analysis, association rules are
employed today in application areas including Web usage mining, intrusion detection, continuous
production, and bioinformatics. In contrast with sequence mining, association rule learning
typically does not consider the order of items either within a transaction or across transactions.
Robot learning
Association rules
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 10/40
Learning classifier systems (LCS) are a family of rule-based machine learning algorithms that
combine a discovery component, typically a genetic algorithm, with a learning component,
performing either supervised learning, reinforcement learning, or unsupervised learning. They
seek to identify a set of context-dependent rules that collectively store and apply knowledge in a
piecewise manner to make predictions.[79]
Inductive logic programming (ILP) is an approach to rule learning using logic programming as a
uniform representation for input examples, background knowledge, and hypotheses. Given an
encoding of the known background knowledge and a set of examples represented as a logical
database of facts, an ILP system will derive a hypothesized logic program that entails all positive
and no negative examples. Inductive programming is a related field that considers any kind of
programming language for representing hypotheses (and not only logic programming), such as
functional programs.
Inductive logic programming is particularly useful in bioinformatics and natural language
processing. Gordon Plotkin and Ehud Shapiro laid the initial theoretical foundation for inductive
machine learning in a logical setting.[80][81][82] Shapiro built their first implementation (Model
Inference System) in 1981: a Prolog program that inductively inferred logic programs from positive
and negative examples.[83] The term inductive here refers to philosophical induction, suggesting a
theory to explain observed facts, rather than mathematical induction, proving a property for all
members of a well-ordered set.
A machine learning model is a type of mathematical model that, once "trained" on a given
dataset, can be used to make predictions or classifications on new data. During training, a learning
algorithm iteratively adjusts the model's internal parameters to minimise errors in its
predictions.[84] By extension, the term "model" can refer to several levels of specificity, from a
general class of models and their associated learning algorithms to a fully trained model with all its
internal parameters tuned.[85]
Various types of models have been used and researched for machine learning systems, picking the
best model for a task is called model selection.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), or connectionist systems, are computing systems vaguely
inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. Such systems "learn" to
perform tasks by considering examples, generally without being programmed with any taskspecific rules.
An ANN is a model based on a collection of connected units or nodes called "artificial neurons",
which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain. Each connection, like the synapses in a
biological brain, can transmit information, a "signal", from one artificial neuron to another. An
artificial neuron that receives a signal can process it and then signal additional artificial neurons
connected to it. In common ANN implementations, the signal at a connection between artificial
neurons is a real number, and the output of each artificial neuron is computed by some non-linear
function of the sum of its inputs. The connections between artificial neurons are called "edges".
Artificial neurons and edges typically have a weight that adjusts as learning proceeds. The weight
Models
Artificial neural networks
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 11/40
An artificial neural network is an
interconnected group of nodes, akin
to the vast network of neurons in a
brain. Here, each circular node
represents an artificial neuron and an
arrow represents a connection from
the output of one artificial neuron to
the input of another.
A decision tree showing survival probability of
passengers on the Titanic
increases or decreases the strength of the signal at a
connection. Artificial neurons may have a threshold such that
the signal is only sent if the aggregate signal crosses that
threshold. Typically, artificial neurons are aggregated into
layers. Different layers may perform different kinds of
transformations on their inputs. Signals travel from the first
layer (the input layer) to the last layer (the output layer),
possibly after traversing the layers multiple times.
The original goal of the ANN approach was to solve problems
in the same way that a human brain would. However, over
time, attention moved to performing specific tasks, leading to
deviations from biology. Artificial neural networks have been
used on a variety of tasks, including computer vision, speech
recognition, machine translation, social network filtering,
playing board and video games and medical diagnosis.
Deep learning consists of multiple hidden layers in an artificial
neural network. This approach tries to model the way the
human brain processes light and sound into vision and
hearing. Some successful applications of deep learning are
computer vision and speech recognition.[86]
Decision tree learning uses a decision tree as a
predictive model to go from observations about an
item (represented in the branches) to conclusions
about the item's target value (represented in the
leaves). It is one of the predictive modelling
approaches used in statistics, data mining, and
machine learning. Tree models where the target
variable can take a discrete set of values are called
classification trees; in these tree structures, leaves
represent class labels, and branches represent
conjunctions of features that lead to those class
labels. Decision trees where the target variable can
take continuous values (typically real numbers) are
called regression trees. In decision analysis, a
decision tree can be used to visually and explicitly
represent decisions and decision making. In data
mining, a decision tree describes data, but the
resulting classification tree can be an input for
decision-making.
Decision trees
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 12/40
Illustration of linear regression on a data set
Random forest regression (RFR) falls under the umbrella of decision tree-based models. RFR is an
ensemble learning method that builds multiple decision trees and averages their predictions to
improve accuracy and to avoid overfitting. To build decision trees, RFR uses bootstrapped
sampling; for instance, each decision tree is trained on random data from the training set. This
random selection of RFR for training enables the model to reduce biased predictions and achieve a
higher degree of accuracy. RFR generates independent decision trees, and it can work on singleoutput data as well as multiple regressor tasks. This makes RFR compatible to be use in various
applications.[87][88]
Support-vector machines (SVMs), also known as support-vector networks, are a set of related
supervised learning methods used for classification and regression. Given a set of training
examples, each marked as belonging to one of two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a
model that predicts whether a new example falls into one category.[89] An SVM training algorithm
is a non-probabilistic, binary, linear classifier, although methods such as Platt scaling exist to use
SVM in a probabilistic classification setting. In addition to performing linear classification, SVMs
can efficiently perform a non-linear classification using what is called the kernel trick, implicitly
mapping their inputs into high-dimensional feature spaces.
Regression analysis encompasses a large variety
of statistical methods to estimate the
relationship between input variables and their
associated features. Its most common form is
linear regression, where a single line is drawn
to best fit the given data according to a
mathematical criterion such as ordinary least
squares. The latter is often extended by
regularisation methods to mitigate overfitting
and bias, as in ridge regression. When dealing
with non-linear problems, go-to models include
polynomial regression (for example, used for
trendline fitting in Microsoft Excel[90]
), logistic
regression (often used in statistical classification) or even kernel regression, which introduces nonlinearity by taking advantage of the kernel trick to implicitly map input variables to higherdimensional space.
Multivariate linear regression extends the concept of linear regression to handle multiple
dependent variables simultaneously. This approach estimates the relationships between a set of
input variables and several output variables by fitting a multidimensional linear model. It is
particularly useful in scenarios where outputs are interdependent or share underlying patterns,
such as predicting multiple economic indicators or reconstructing images,[91] which are inherently
multi-dimensional.
Random forest regression
Support-vector machines
Regression analysis
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 13/40
A simple Bayesian network. Rain
influences whether the sprinkler is
activated, and both rain and the sprinkler
influence whether the grass is wet.
An example of Gaussian Process
Regression (prediction) compared with
other regression models
[92]
A Bayesian network, belief network, or directed acyclic
graphical model is a probabilistic graphical model that
represents a set of random variables and their conditional
independence with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). For
example, a Bayesian network could represent the
probabilistic relationships between diseases and
symptoms. Given symptoms, the network can be used to
compute the probabilities of the presence of various
diseases. Efficient algorithms exist that perform inference
and learning. Bayesian networks that model sequences of
variables, like speech signals or protein sequences, are
called dynamic Bayesian networks. Generalisations of
Bayesian networks that can represent and solve decision problems under uncertainty are called
influence diagrams.
A Gaussian process is a stochastic process in which every
finite collection of the random variables in the process has
a multivariate normal distribution, and it relies on a predefined covariance function, or kernel, that models how
pairs of points relate to each other depending on their
locations.
Given a set of observed points, or input–output examples,
the distribution of the (unobserved) output of a new point
as a function of its input data can be directly computed by
looking at the observed points and the covariances between
those points and the new, unobserved point.
Gaussian processes are popular surrogate models in Bayesian optimisation used to do
hyperparameter optimisation.
A genetic algorithm (GA) is a search algorithm and heuristic technique that mimics the process of
natural selection, using methods such as mutation and crossover to generate new genotypes in the
hope of finding good solutions to a given problem. In machine learning, genetic algorithms were
used in the 1980s and 1990s.[93][94] Conversely, machine learning techniques have been used to
improve the performance of genetic and evolutionary algorithms.
[95]
The theory of belief functions, also referred to as evidence theory or Dempster–Shafer theory, is a
general framework for reasoning with uncertainty, with understood connections to other
frameworks such as probability, possibility and imprecise probability theories. These theoretical
frameworks can be thought of as a kind of learner and have some analogous properties of how
evidence is combined (e.g., Dempster's rule of combination), just like how in a pmf-based Bayesian
Bayesian networks
Gaussian processes
Genetic algorithms
Belief functions
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 14/40
approach would combine probabilities.[96] However, there are many caveats to these beliefs
functions when compared to Bayesian approaches to incorporate ignorance and uncertainty
quantification. These belief function approaches that are implemented within the machine learning
domain typically leverage a fusion approach of various ensemble methods to better handle the
learner's decision boundary, low samples, and ambiguous class issues that standard machine
learning approach tend to have difficulty resolving.[97][6] However, the computational complexity
of these algorithms is dependent on the number of propositions (classes), and can lead to a much
higher computation time when compared to other machine learning approaches.
Rule-based machine learning (RBML) is a branch of machine learning that automatically discovers
and learns 'rules' from data. It provides interpretable models, making it useful for decision-making
in fields like healthcare, fraud detection, and cybersecurity. Key RBML techniques includes
learning classifier systems,
[98] association rule learning,
[99] artificial immune systems,
[100] and
other similar models. These methods extract patterns from data and evolve rules over time.
Typically, machine learning models require a high quantity of reliable data to perform accurate
predictions. When training a machine learning model, machine learning engineers need to target
and collect a large and representative sample of data. Data from the training set can be as varied as
a corpus of text, a collection of images, sensor data, and data collected from individual users of a
service. Overfitting is something to watch out for when training a machine learning model. Trained
models derived from biased or non-evaluated data can result in skewed or undesired predictions.
Biased models may result in detrimental outcomes, thereby furthering the negative impacts on
society or objectives. Algorithmic bias is a potential result of data not being fully prepared for
training. Machine learning ethics is becoming a field of study and, notably, becoming integrated
within machine learning engineering teams.
Federated learning is an adapted form of distributed artificial intelligence to train machine
learning models that decentralises the training process, allowing for users' privacy to be
maintained by not needing to send their data to a centralised server. This also increases efficiency
by decentralising the training process to many devices. For example, Gboard uses federated
machine learning to train search query prediction models on users' mobile phones without having
to send individual searches back to Google.
[101]
There are many applications for machine learning, including:
Agriculture
Anatomy
Adaptive website
Affective computing
Astronomy
Automated decision-making
Banking
Behaviorism
Bioinformatics
Brain–machine interfaces
Rule-based models
Training models
Federated learning
Applications
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 15/40
Cheminformatics
Citizen Science
Climate Science
Computer networks
Computer vision
Credit-card fraud detection
Data quality
DNA sequence classification
Economics
Financial data analysis[102]
General game playing
Handwriting recognition
Healthcare
Information retrieval
Insurance
Internet fraud detection
Investment management [103]
Knowledge graph embedding
Linguistics
Machine learning control
Machine perception
Machine translation
Material Engineering
Marketing
Medical diagnosis
Natural language processing
Natural language understanding
Online advertising
Optimisation
Recommender systems
Robot locomotion
Search engines
Sentiment analysis
Sequence mining
Software engineering
Speech recognition
Structural health monitoring
Syntactic pattern recognition
Telecommunications
Theorem proving
Time-series forecasting
Tomographic reconstruction[104]
User behaviour analytics
In 2006, the media-services provider Netflix held the first "Netflix Prize" competition to find a
program to better predict user preferences and improve the accuracy of its existing Cinematch
movie recommendation algorithm by at least 10%. A joint team made up of researchers from AT&T
Labs-Research in collaboration with the teams Big Chaos and Pragmatic Theory built an ensemble
model to win the Grand Prize in 2009 for $1 million.[105] Shortly after the prize was awarded,
Netflix realised that viewers' ratings were not the best indicators of their viewing patterns
("everything is a recommendation") and they changed their recommendation engine
accordingly.[106]
In 2010, an article in The Wall Street Journal noted the use of machine learning
by Rebellion Research to predict the 2008 financial crisis.
[107]
In 2012, co-founder of Sun
Microsystems, Vinod Khosla, predicted that 80% of medical doctors jobs would be lost in the next
two decades to automated machine learning medical diagnostic software.[108]
In 2014, it was
reported that a machine learning algorithm had been applied in the field of art history to study fine
art paintings and that it may have revealed previously unrecognised influences among artists.[109]
In 2019 Springer Nature published the first research book created using machine learning.[110]
In
2020, machine learning technology was used to help make diagnoses and aid researchers in
developing a cure for COVID-19.[111] Machine learning was recently applied to predict the proenvironmental behaviour of travellers.[112] Recently, machine learning technology was also applied
to optimise smartphone's performance and thermal behaviour based on the user's interaction with
the phone.[113][114][115] When applied correctly, machine learning algorithms (MLAs) can utilise a
wide range of company characteristics to predict stock returns without overfitting. By employing
effective feature engineering and combining forecasts, MLAs can generate results that far surpass
those obtained from basic linear techniques like OLS.
[116]
Recent advancements in machine learning have extended into the field of quantum chemistry,
where novel algorithms now enable the prediction of solvent effects on chemical reactions, thereby
offering new tools for chemists to tailor experimental conditions for optimal outcomes.[117]
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 16/40
Machine Learning is becoming a useful tool to investigate and predict evacuation decision-making
in large-scale and small-scale disasters. Different solutions have been tested to predict if and when
householders decide to evacuate during wildfires and hurricanes.[118][119][120] Other applications
have been focusing on pre evacuation decisions in building fires.[121][122]
Although machine learning has been transformative in some fields, machine-learning programs
often fail to deliver expected results.[123][124][125] Reasons for this are numerous: lack of (suitable)
data, lack of access to the data, data bias, privacy problems, badly chosen tasks and algorithms,
wrong tools and people, lack of resources, and evaluation problems.[126]
The "black box theory" poses another yet significant challenge. Black box refers to a situation
where the algorithm or the process of producing an output is entirely opaque, meaning that even
the coders of the algorithm cannot audit the pattern that the machine extracted from the data.[127]
The House of Lords Select Committee, which claimed that such an "intelligence system" that could
have a "substantial impact on an individual's life" would not be considered acceptable unless it
provided "a full and satisfactory explanation for the decisions" it makes.[127]
In 2018, a self-driving car from Uber failed to detect a pedestrian, who was killed after a
collision.[128] Attempts to use machine learning in healthcare with the IBM Watson system failed
to deliver even after years of time and billions of dollars invested.[129][130] Microsoft's Bing Chat
chatbot has been reported to produce hostile and offensive response against its users.[131]
Machine learning has been used as a strategy to update the evidence related to a systematic review
and increased reviewer burden related to the growth of biomedical literature. While it has
improved with training sets, it has not yet developed sufficiently to reduce the workload burden
without limiting the necessary sensitivity for the findings research itself.[132]
Explainable AI (XAI), or Interpretable AI, or Explainable Machine Learning (XML), is artificial
intelligence (AI) in which humans can understand the decisions or predictions made by the AI.[133]
It contrasts with the "black box" concept in machine learning where even its designers cannot
explain why an AI arrived at a specific decision.[134] By refining the mental models of users of AIpowered systems and dismantling their misconceptions, XAI promises to help users perform more
effectively. XAI may be an implementation of the social right to explanation.
Settling on a bad, overly complex theory gerrymandered to fit all the past training data is known as
overfitting. Many systems attempt to reduce overfitting by rewarding a theory in accordance with
how well it fits the data but penalising the theory in accordance with how complex the theory
is.[135]
Limitations
Explainability
Overfitting
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 17/40
The blue line could be an example of
overfitting a linear function due to random
noise.
Learners can also be disappointed by "learning the wrong
lesson". A toy example is that an image classifier trained
only on pictures of brown horses and black cats might
conclude that all brown patches are likely to be horses.[136]
A real-world example is that, unlike humans, current
image classifiers often do not primarily make judgments
from the spatial relationship between components of the
picture, and they learn relationships between pixels that
humans are oblivious to, but that still correlate with
images of certain types of real objects. Modifying these
patterns on a legitimate image can result in "adversarial"
images that the system misclassifies.[137][138]
Adversarial vulnerabilities can also result in nonlinear systems or from non-pattern perturbations.
For some systems, it is possible to change the output by only changing a single adversarially
chosen pixel.[139] Machine learning models are often vulnerable to manipulation or evasion via
adversarial machine learning.
[140]
Researchers have demonstrated how backdoors can be placed undetectably into classifying (e.g.,
for categories "spam" and "not spam" of posts) machine learning models that are often developed
or trained by third parties. Parties can change the classification of any input, including in cases for
which a type of data/software transparency is provided, possibly including white-box
access.
[141][142][143]
Classification of machine learning models can be validated by accuracy estimation techniques like
the holdout method, which splits the data into a training and test set (conventionally 2/3 training
set and 1/3 test set designation) and evaluates the performance of the training model on the test
set. In comparison, the K-fold-cross-validation method randomly partitions the data into K subsets
and then K experiments are performed each considering 1 subset for evaluation and the remaining
K-1 subsets for training the model. In addition to the holdout and cross-validation methods,
bootstrap, which samples n instances with replacement from the dataset, can be used to assess
model accuracy.[144]
In addition to overall accuracy, investigators frequently report sensitivity and specificity, meaning
true positive rate (TPR) and true negative rate (TNR), respectively. Similarly, investigators
sometimes report the false positive rate (FPR) as well as the false negative rate (FNR). However,
these rates are ratios that fail to reveal their numerators and denominators. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC), along with the accompanying Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC), offer
additional tools for classification model assessment. Higher AUC is associated with a better
performing model.[145]
Other limitations and vulnerabilities
Model assessments
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 18/40
The ethics of artificial intelligence covers a broad range of topics within AI that are considered to
have particular ethical stakes.[146] This includes algorithmic biases, fairness,
[147] automated
decision-making,
[148] accountability, privacy, and regulation. It also covers various emerging or
potential future challenges such as machine ethics (how to make machines that behave ethically),
lethal autonomous weapon systems, arms race dynamics, AI safety and alignment, technological
unemployment, AI-enabled misinformation,
[149] how to treat certain AI systems if they have a
moral status (AI welfare and rights), artificial superintelligence and existential risks.
[146]
Some application areas may also have particularly important ethical implications, like healthcare,
education, criminal justice, or the military.
Different machine learning approaches can suffer from different data biases. A machine learning
system trained specifically on current customers may not be able to predict the needs of new
customer groups that are not represented in the training data. When trained on human-made data,
machine learning is likely to pick up the constitutional and unconscious biases already present in
society.[150]
Systems that are trained on datasets collected with biases may exhibit these biases upon use
(algorithmic bias), thus digitising cultural prejudices.[151] For example, in 1988, the UK's
Commission for Racial Equality found that St. George's Medical School had been using a computer
program trained from data of previous admissions staff and this program had denied nearly 60
candidates who were found to either be women or have non-European-sounding names.[150] Using
job hiring data from a firm with racist hiring policies may lead to a machine learning system
duplicating the bias by scoring job applicants by similarity to previous successful
applicants.[152][153] Another example includes predictive policing company Geolitica's predictive
algorithm that resulted in "disproportionately high levels of over-policing in low-income and
minority communities" after being trained with historical crime data.[154]
While responsible collection of data and documentation of algorithmic rules used by a system is
considered a critical part of machine learning, some researchers blame the lack of participation
and representation of minority populations in the field of AI for machine learning's vulnerability to
biases.[155]
In fact, according to research carried out by the Computing Research Association in
2021, "female faculty make up just 16.1%" of all faculty members who focus on AI among several
universities around the world.[156] Furthermore, among the group of "new U.S. resident AI PhD
graduates," 45% identified as white, 22.4% as Asian, 3.2% as Hispanic, and 2.4% as African
American, which further demonstrates a lack of diversity in the field of AI.[156]
Language models learned from data have been shown to contain human-like biases.[157][158]
Because human languages contain biases, machines trained on language corpora will necessarily
also learn these biases.[159][160]
In 2016, Microsoft tested Tay, a chatbot that learned from Twitter,
and it quickly picked up racist and sexist language.[161]
Ethics
Bias
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 19/40
In an experiment carried out by ProPublica, an investigative journalism organisation, a machine
learning algorithm's insight into the recidivism rates among prisoners falsely flagged "black
defendants high risk twice as often as white defendants".[154]
In 2015, Google Photos once tagged a
couple of black people as gorillas, which caused controversy. The gorilla label was subsequently
removed, and in 2023, it still cannot recognise gorillas.[162] Similar issues with recognising nonwhite people have been found in many other systems.[163]
Because of such challenges, the effective use of machine learning may take longer to be adopted in
other domains.[164] Concern for fairness in machine learning, that is, reducing bias in machine
learning and propelling its use for human good, is increasingly expressed by artificial intelligence
scientists, including Fei-Fei Li, who said that "[t]here's nothing artificial about AI. It's inspired by
people, it's created by people, and—most importantly—it impacts people. It is a powerful tool we
are only just beginning to understand, and that is a profound responsibility."[165]
There are concerns among health care professionals that these systems might not be designed in
the public's interest but as income-generating machines. This is especially true in the United
States, where there is a long-standing ethical dilemma of improving health care, but also increasing
profits. For example, the algorithms could be designed to provide patients with unnecessary tests
or medication in which the algorithm's proprietary owners hold stakes. There is potential for
machine learning in health care to provide professionals with an additional tool to diagnose,
medicate, and plan recovery paths for patients, but this requires these biases to be mitigated.[166]
Since the 2010s, advances in both machine learning algorithms and computer hardware have led
to more efficient methods for training deep neural networks (a particular narrow subdomain of
machine learning) that contain many layers of nonlinear hidden units.[167] By 2019, graphics
processing units (GPUs), often with AI-specific enhancements, had displaced CPUs as the
dominant method of training large-scale commercial cloud AI.[168] OpenAI estimated the
hardware compute used in the largest deep learning projects from AlexNet (2012) to AlphaZero
(2017), and found a 300,000-fold increase in the amount of compute required, with a doublingtime trendline of 3.4 months.[169][170]
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) are specialised hardware accelerators developed by Google
specifically for machine learning workloads. Unlike general-purpose GPUs and FPGAs, TPUs are
optimised for tensor computations, making them particularly efficient for deep learning tasks such
as training and inference. They are widely used in Google Cloud AI services and large-scale
machine learning models like Google's DeepMind AlphaFold and large language models. TPUs
leverage matrix multiplication units and high-bandwidth memory to accelerate computations
while maintaining energy efficiency.[171] Since their introduction in 2016, TPUs have become a key
component of AI infrastructure, especially in cloud-based environments.
Financial incentives
Hardware
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs)
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 20/40
Neuromorphic computing refers to a class of computing systems designed to emulate the structure
and functionality of biological neural networks. These systems may be implemented through
software-based simulations on conventional hardware or through specialised hardware
architectures.[172]
A physical neural network is a specific type of neuromorphic hardware that relies on electrically
adjustable materials, such as memristors, to emulate the function of neural synapses. The term
"physical neural network" highlights the use of physical hardware for computation, as opposed to
software-based implementations. It broadly refers to artificial neural networks that use materials
with adjustable resistance to replicate neural synapses.[173][174]
Embedded machine learning is a sub-field of machine learning where models are deployed on
embedded systems with limited computing resources, such as wearable computers, edge devices
and microcontrollers.
[175][176][177][178] Running models directly on these devices eliminates the
need to transfer and store data on cloud servers for further processing, thereby reducing the risk of
data breaches, privacy leaks and theft of intellectual property, personal data and business secrets.
Embedded machine learning can be achieved through various techniques, such as hardware
acceleration,
[179][180] approximate computing,
[181] and model optimisation.[182][183] Common
optimisation techniques include pruning, quantisation, knowledge distillation, low-rank
factorisation, network architecture search, and parameter sharing.
Software suites containing a variety of machine learning algorithms include the following:
Caffe
Deeplearning4j
DeepSpeed
ELKI
Google JAX
Infer.NET
JASP
Jubatus
Keras
Kubeflow
LightGBM
Mahout
Mallet
Microsoft Cognitive Toolkit
ML.NET
mlpack
MXNet
OpenNN
Orange
pandas (software)
ROOT (TMVA with ROOT)
scikit-learn
Shogun
Spark MLlib
SystemML
Theano
TensorFlow
Torch / PyTorch
Weka / MOA
XGBoost
Neuromorphic computing
Physical neural networks
Embedded machine learning
Software
Free and open-source software
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 21/40
Yooreeka
KNIME
RapidMiner
Amazon Machine Learning
Angoss KnowledgeSTUDIO
Azure Machine Learning
IBM Watson Studio
Google Cloud Vertex AI
Google Prediction API
IBM SPSS Modeller
KXEN Modeller
LIONsolver
Mathematica
MATLAB
Neural Designer
NeuroSolutions
Oracle Data Mining
Oracle AI Platform Cloud Service
PolyAnalyst
RCASE
SAS Enterprise Miner
SequenceL
Splunk
STATISTICA Data Miner
Journal of Machine Learning Research
Machine Learning
Nature Machine Intelligence
Neural Computation
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge
Discovery in Databases (ECML PKDD)
International Conference on Computational Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and
Biostatistics (CIBB)
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD)
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
Automated machine learning – Process of automating the application of machine learning
Big data – Extremely large or complex datasets
Proprietary software with free and open-source editions
Proprietary software
Journals
Conferences
See also
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 22/40
Deep learning — branch of ML concerned with artificial neural networks
Differentiable programming – Programming paradigm
List of datasets for machine-learning research
List of machine learning algorithms and List of algorithms for machine learning and statistical
classification
M-theory (learning framework) – Framework in machine learning
Machine unlearning – Field of study in artificial intelligence
Outline of machine learning
Solomonoff's theory of inductive inference – Mathematical theory
1. The definition "without being explicitly programmed" is often attributed to Arthur Samuel, who
coined the term "machine learning" in 1959, but the phrase is not found verbatim in this
publication, and may be a paraphrase that appeared later. Confer "Paraphrasing Arthur
Samuel (1959), the question is: How can computers learn to solve problems without being
explicitly programmed?" in Koza, John R.; Bennett, Forrest H.; Andre, David; Keane, Martin A.
(1996). "Automated Design of Both the Topology and Sizing of Analog Electrical Circuits Using
Genetic Programming". Artificial Intelligence in Design '96. Artificial Intelligence in Design '96.
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer Netherlands. pp. 151–170. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-0279-
4_9 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-94-009-0279-4_9). ISBN 978-94-010-6610-5.
2. Bishop, C. M. (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, ISBN 978-0-387-
31073-2
3. Machine learning and pattern recognition "can be viewed as two facets of the same field".[2]:vii 
4. Friedman, Jerome H. (1998). "Data Mining and Statistics: What's the connection?". Computing
Science and Statistics. 29 (1): 3–9.
5. Samuel, Arthur (1959). "Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Checkers". IBM
Journal of Research and Development. 3 (3): 210–229. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.368.2254 (https://cite
seerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.368.2254). doi:10.1147/rd.33.0210 (https://doi.
org/10.1147%2Frd.33.0210). S2CID 2126705 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:21267
05).
6. R. Kohavi and F. Provost, "Glossary of terms", Machine Learning, vol. 30, no. 2–3, pp. 271–
274, 1998.
7. Gerovitch, Slava (9 April 2015). "How the Computer Got Its Revenge on the Soviet Union" (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20210922175839/https://nautil.us/issue/23/Dominoes/how-the-comput
er-got-its-revenge-on-the-soviet-union). Nautilus. Archived from the original (https://nautil.us/iss
ue/23/dominoes/how-the-computer-got-its-revenge-on-the-soviet-union) on 22 September
2021. Retrieved 19 September 2021.
8. Lindsay, Richard P. (1 September 1964). "The Impact of Automation On Public Administration"
(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/106591296401700364). Western Political Quarterly.
17 (3): 78–81. doi:10.1177/106591296401700364 (https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1065912964017
00364). ISSN 0043-4078 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0043-4078). S2CID 154021253 (http
s://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:154021253). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2021
1006190841/https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/106591296401700364) from the
original on 6 October 2021. Retrieved 6 October 2021.
9. "History and Evolution of Machine Learning: A Timeline" (https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/ATimeline-of-Machine-Learning-History). WhatIs. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2023120
8220935/https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/A-Timeline-of-Machine-Learning-History) from the
original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023.
References
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 23/40
10. Milner, Peter M. (1993). "The Mind and Donald O. Hebb". Scientific American. 268 (1): 124–
129. Bibcode:1993SciAm.268a.124M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1993SciAm.268a.124
M). doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0193-124 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fscientificamerican019
3-124). ISSN 0036-8733 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0036-8733). JSTOR 24941344 (http
s://www.jstor.org/stable/24941344). PMID 8418480 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8418480).
11. "Science: The Goof Button", Time, 18 August 1961.
12. Nilsson, Nils J. (1965). Learning Machines. McGraw-Hill.
13. Duda, R., Hart P. Pattern Recognition and Scene Analysis, Wiley Interscience, 1973
14. S. Bozinovski, "Teaching space: A representation concept for adaptive pattern classification"
COINS Technical Report No. 81-28, Computer and Information Science Department, University
of Massachusetts at Amherst, MA, 1981. https://web.cs.umass.edu/publication/docs/1981/UMCS-1981-028.pdf Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210225070218/https://web.cs.umas
s.edu/publication/docs/1981/UM-CS-1981-028.pdf) 25 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine
15. Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine Learning. McGraw Hill. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-07-042807-2.
16. Harnad, Stevan (2008), "The Annotation Game: On Turing (1950) on Computing, Machinery,
and Intelligence" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120309113922/http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/1
2954/), in Epstein, Robert; Peters, Grace (eds.), The Turing Test Sourcebook: Philosophical
and Methodological Issues in the Quest for the Thinking Computer, Kluwer, pp. 23–66,
ISBN 978-1-4020-6708-2, archived from the original (http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/12954/) on
9 March 2012, retrieved 11 December 2012
17. "Machine Learning Algorithms" (https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/machine-learning/machine-lear
ning-algorithms/). GeeksforGeeks. 17 August 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2025.
18. Goodfellow, Ian; Pouget-Abadie, Jean; Mirza, Mehdi (2014). Generative adversarial nets (http
s://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2014/file/f033ed80deb0234979a61f95710dbe25-
Paper.pdf) (PDF). Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (2014).
19. Silver, David; Huang, Aja; Maddison, Christopher J. (2016). "Mastering the game of Go with
deep neural networks and tree search" (https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16961). Nature.
529: 484–489. doi:10.1038/nature16961 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnature16961).
20. Sindhu V, Nivedha S, Prakash M (February 2020). "An Empirical Science Research on
Bioinformatics in Machine Learning" (https://doi.org/10.26782%2Fjmcms.spl.7%2F2020.02.000
06). Journal of Mechanics of Continua and Mathematical Sciences (7).
doi:10.26782/jmcms.spl.7/2020.02.00006 (https://doi.org/10.26782%2Fjmcms.spl.7%2F2020.0
2.00006).
21. Sarle, Warren S. (1994). "Neural Networks and statistical models". SUGI 19: proceedings of
the Nineteenth Annual SAS Users Group International Conference. SAS Institute. pp. 1538–50.
ISBN 978-1-55544-611-6. OCLC 35546178 (https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/35546178).
22. Russell, Stuart; Norvig, Peter (2003) [1995]. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach
(2nd ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0137903955.
23. Langley, Pat (2011). "The changing science of machine learning" (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs
10994-011-5242-y). Machine Learning. 82 (3): 275–9. doi:10.1007/s10994-011-5242-y (https://
doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10994-011-5242-y).
24. Mahoney, Matt. "Rationale for a Large Text Compression Benchmark" (https://web.archive.org/
web/20060818205830/http://cs.fit.edu/~mmahoney/compression/rationale.html). Florida
Institute of Technology. Archived from the original (http://cs.fit.edu/~mmahoney/compression/rat
ionale.html) on 18 August 2006. Retrieved 5 March 2013.
25. Shmilovici A.; Kahiri Y.; Ben-Gal I.; Hauser S. (2009). "Measuring the Efficiency of the Intraday
Forex Market with a Universal Data Compression Algorithm" (http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~bengal/
28.pdf) (PDF). Computational Economics. 33 (2): 131–154. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.627.3751 (https://
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.627.3751). doi:10.1007/s10614-008-9153-
3 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10614-008-9153-3). S2CID 17234503 (https://api.semanticschol
ar.org/CorpusID:17234503). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090709143601/http://ww
w.eng.tau.ac.il/~bengal/28.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2009.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 24/40
26. I. Ben-Gal (2008). "On the Use of Data Compression Measures to Analyze Robust Designs" (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20200926205659/http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~bengal/Journal%20Pape
r.pdf) (PDF). IEEE Transactions on Reliability. 54 (3): 381–388. doi:10.1109/TR.2005.853280
(https://doi.org/10.1109%2FTR.2005.853280). S2CID 9376086 (https://api.semanticscholar.or
g/CorpusID:9376086). Archived from the original (http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~bengal/Journal%20
Paper.pdf) (PDF) on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2016.
27. D. Scully; Carla E. Brodley (2006). "Compression and Machine Learning: A New Perspective
on Feature Space Vectors". Data Compression Conference (DCC'06). p. 332.
doi:10.1109/DCC.2006.13 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2FDCC.2006.13). ISBN 0-7695-2545-8.
S2CID 12311412 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:12311412).
28. Gary Adcock (5 January 2023). "What Is AI Video Compression?" (https://massive.io/file-transf
er/what-is-ai-video-compression/). massive.io. Retrieved 6 April 2023.
29. Mentzer, Fabian; Toderici, George; Tschannen, Michael; Agustsson, Eirikur (2020). "HighFidelity Generative Image Compression". arXiv:2006.09965 (https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09965)
[eess.IV (https://arxiv.org/archive/eess.IV)].
30. "What is Unsupervised Learning? | IBM" (https://www.ibm.com/topics/unsupervised-learning).
www.ibm.com. 23 September 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2024.
31. "Differentially private clustering for large-scale datasets" (https://blog.research.google/2023/05/
differentially-private-clustering-for.html). blog.research.google. 25 May 2023. Retrieved
16 March 2024.
32. Edwards, Benj (28 September 2023). "AI language models can exceed PNG and FLAC in
lossless compression, says study" (https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2023/09/ai-l
anguage-models-can-exceed-png-and-flac-in-lossless-compression-says-study/). Ars
Technica. Retrieved 7 March 2024.
33. Delétang, Grégoire; Ruoss, Anian; Duquenne, Paul-Ambroise; Catt, Elliot; Genewein, Tim;
Mattern, Christopher; Grau-Moya, Jordi; Li Kevin Wenliang; Aitchison, Matthew; Orseau,
Laurent; Hutter, Marcus; Veness, Joel (2023). "Language Modeling is Compression".
arXiv:2309.10668 (https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.10668) [cs.LG (https://arxiv.org/archive/cs.LG)].
34. Le Roux, Nicolas; Bengio, Yoshua; Fitzgibbon, Andrew (2012). "Improving First and SecondOrder Methods by Modeling Uncertainty" (https://books.google.com/books?id=JPQx7s2L1A8C
&q=%22Improving+First+and+Second-Order+Methods+by+Modeling+Uncertainty&pg=PA40
3). In Sra, Suvrit; Nowozin, Sebastian; Wright, Stephen J. (eds.). Optimization for Machine
Learning. MIT Press. p. 404. ISBN 978-0-262-01646-9. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0230117053335/https://books.google.com/books?id=JPQx7s2L1A8C&q=%22Improving+First+
and+Second-Order+Methods+by+Modeling+Uncertainty&pg=PA403) from the original on 17
January 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2020.
35. Bzdok, Danilo; Altman, Naomi; Krzywinski, Martin (2018). "Statistics versus Machine Learning"
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6082636). Nature Methods. 15 (4): 233–234.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4642 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fnmeth.4642). PMC 6082636 (https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6082636). PMID 30100822 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/30100822).
36. Hung et al. Algorithms to Measure Surgeon Performance and Anticipate Clinical Outcomes in
Robotic Surgery. JAMA Surg. 2018
37. Cornell University Library (August 2001). "Breiman: Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures
(with comments and a rejoinder by the author)" (http://projecteuclid.org/download/pdf_1/euclid.
ss/1009213726). Statistical Science. 16 (3). doi:10.1214/ss/1009213726 (https://doi.org/10.121
4%2Fss%2F1009213726). S2CID 62729017 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:627290
17). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170626042637/http://projecteuclid.org/download/
pdf_1/euclid.ss/1009213726) from the original on 26 June 2017. Retrieved 8 August 2015.
38. Gareth James; Daniela Witten; Trevor Hastie; Robert Tibshirani (2013). An Introduction to
Statistical Learning (http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~gareth/ISL/). Springer. p. vii. Archived (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20190623150237/http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~gareth/ISL/) from the original on
23 June 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2014.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 25/40
39. Ramezanpour, A.; Beam, A.L.; Chen, J.H.; Mashaghi, A. (17 November 2020). "Statistical
Physics for Medical Diagnostics: Learning, Inference, and Optimization Algorithms" (https://ww
w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7699346). Diagnostics. 10 (11): 972.
doi:10.3390/diagnostics10110972 (https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fdiagnostics10110972).
PMC 7699346 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7699346). PMID 33228143 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33228143).
40. Mashaghi, A.; Ramezanpour, A. (16 March 2018). "Statistical physics of medical diagnostics:
Study of a probabilistic model". Physical Review E. 97 (3–1) 032118. arXiv:1803.10019 (https://
arxiv.org/abs/1803.10019). Bibcode:2018PhRvE..97c2118M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/ab
s/2018PhRvE..97c2118M). doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.97.032118 (https://doi.org/10.1103%2FPhys
RevE.97.032118). PMID 29776109 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29776109).
S2CID 4955393 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4955393).
41. Mohri, Mehryar; Rostamizadeh, Afshin; Talwalkar, Ameet (2012). Foundations of Machine
Learning. US, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 9780262018258.
42. Alpaydin, Ethem (2010). Introduction to Machine Learning (https://archive.org/details/introducti
ontoma00alpa_0). London: The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01243-0. Retrieved 4 February
2017.
43. Jordan, M. I.; Mitchell, T. M. (17 July 2015). "Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and
prospects". Science. 349 (6245): 255–260. Bibcode:2015Sci...349..255J (https://ui.adsabs.harv
ard.edu/abs/2015Sci...349..255J). doi:10.1126/science.aaa8415 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsci
ence.aaa8415). PMID 26185243 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26185243). S2CID 677218
(https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:677218).
44. El Naqa, Issam; Murphy, Martin J. (2015). "What is Machine Learning?". Machine Learning in
Radiation Oncology. pp. 3–11. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-18305-3_1 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F9
78-3-319-18305-3_1). ISBN 978-3-319-18304-6. S2CID 178586107 (https://api.semanticschola
r.org/CorpusID:178586107).
45. Okolie, Jude A.; Savage, Shauna; Ogbaga, Chukwuma C.; Gunes, Burcu (June 2022).
"Assessing the potential of machine learning methods to study the removal of pharmaceuticals
from wastewater using biochar or activated carbon" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.totert.2022.10
0001). Total Environment Research Themes. 1–2 100001. Bibcode:2022TERT....100001O (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2022TERT....100001O). doi:10.1016/j.totert.2022.100001 (http
s://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.totert.2022.100001). S2CID 249022386 (https://api.semanticscholar.or
g/CorpusID:249022386).
46. Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2010). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (Third ed.).
Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-604259-4.
47. Mohri, Mehryar; Rostamizadeh, Afshin; Talwalkar, Ameet (2012). Foundations of Machine
Learning. The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01825-8.
48. Alpaydin, Ethem (2010). Introduction to Machine Learning (https://books.google.com/books?id
=7f5bBAAAQBAJ). MIT Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-262-01243-0. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20230117053338/https://books.google.com/books?id=7f5bBAAAQBAJ) from the original
on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
49. De Sa, Christopher (Spring 2022). "Lecture 2 Notes: Supervised Learning" (https://www.cs.cor
nell.edu/courses/cs4780/2022sp/notes/LectureNotes02.html). Cornell: Computer Science.
Retrieved 1 July 2024.
50. Jordan, Michael I.; Bishop, Christopher M. (2004). "Neural Networks". In Allen B. Tucker (ed.).
Computer Science Handbook, Second Edition (Section VII: Intelligent Systems). Boca Raton,
Florida: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press LLC. ISBN 978-1-58488-360-9.
51. Misra, Ishan; Maaten, Laurens van der (2020). Self-Supervised Learning of Pretext-Invariant
Representations (https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/html/Misra_Self-Supervi
sed_Learning_of_Pretext-Invariant_Representations_CVPR_2020_paper.html). 2020
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Seattle, WA, US: IEEE.
pp. 6707–6717. arXiv:1912.01991 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01991).
doi:10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00674 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2FCVPR42600.2020.00674).
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 26/40
52. Jaiswal, Ashish; Babu, Ashwin Ramesh; Zadeh, Mohammad Zaki; Banerjee, Debapriya;
Makedon, Fillia (March 2021). "A Survey on Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning" (https://doi.
org/10.3390%2Ftechnologies9010002). Technologies. 9 (1): 2. arXiv:2011.00362 (https://arxiv.
org/abs/2011.00362). doi:10.3390/technologies9010002 (https://doi.org/10.3390%2Ftechnologi
es9010002). ISSN 2227-7080 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2227-7080).
53. Alex Ratner; Stephen Bach; Paroma Varma; Chris. "Weak Supervision: The New Programming
Paradigm for Machine Learning" (https://web.archive.org/web/20190606043931/https://hazyres
earch.github.io/snorkel/blog/ws_blog_post.html). hazyresearch.github.io. referencing work by
many other members of Hazy Research. Archived from the original (https://hazyresearch.githu
b.io/snorkel/blog/ws_blog_post.html) on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 6 June 2019.
54. van Otterlo, M.; Wiering, M. (2012). "Reinforcement Learning and Markov Decision
Processes". Reinforcement Learning. Adaptation, Learning, and Optimization. Vol. 12. pp. 3–
42. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-27645-3_1 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-3-642-27645-3_1).
ISBN 978-3-642-27644-6.
55. Roweis, Sam T.; Saul, Lawrence K. (22 December 2000). "Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction
by Locally Linear Embedding" (https://science.sciencemag.org/content/290/5500/2323).
Science. 290 (5500): 2323–2326. Bibcode:2000Sci...290.2323R (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/2000Sci...290.2323R). doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2323 (https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fsci
ence.290.5500.2323). PMID 11125150 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11125150).
S2CID 5987139 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5987139). Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20210815021528/https://science.sciencemag.org/content/290/5500/2323) from
the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2023.
56. Pavel Brazdil; Christophe Giraud Carrier; Carlos Soares; Ricardo Vilalta (2009). Metalearning:
Applications to Data Mining (Fourth ed.). Springer Science+Business Media. pp. 10–14,
passim. ISBN 978-3-540-73262-4.
57. Bozinovski, S. (1982). "A self-learning system using secondary reinforcement". In Trappl,
Robert (ed.). Cybernetics and Systems Research: Proceedings of the Sixth European Meeting
on Cybernetics and Systems Research. North-Holland. pp. 397–402. ISBN 978-0-444-86488-
8.
58. Bozinovski, S. (1999) "Crossbar Adaptive Array: The first connectionist network that solved the
delayed reinforcement learning problem" In A. Dobnikar, N. Steele, D. Pearson, R. Albert (eds.)
Artificial Neural Networks and Genetic Algorithms, Springer Verlag, p. 320–325, ISBN 3-211-
83364-1
59. Bozinovski, Stevo (2014) "Modeling mechanisms of cognition-emotion interaction in artificial
neural networks, since 1981." Procedia Computer Science p. 255–263
60. Bozinovski, S. (2001) "Self-learning agents: A connectionist theory of emotion based on
crossbar value judgment." Cybernetics and Systems 32(6) 637–667.
61. Y. Bengio; A. Courville; P. Vincent (2013). "Representation Learning: A Review and New
Perspectives". IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. 35 (8): 1798–
1828. arXiv:1206.5538 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5538). Bibcode:2013ITPAM..35.1798B (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ITPAM..35.1798B). doi:10.1109/tpami.2013.50 (https://doi.o
rg/10.1109%2Ftpami.2013.50). PMID 23787338 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23787338).
S2CID 393948 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:393948).
62. Nathan Srebro; Jason D. M. Rennie; Tommi S. Jaakkola (2004). Maximum-Margin Matrix
Factorization. NIPS.
63. Coates, Adam; Lee, Honglak; Ng, Andrew Y. (2011). An analysis of single-layer networks in
unsupervised feature learning (https://web.archive.org/web/20170813153615/http://machinelea
rning.wustl.edu/mlpapers/paper_files/AISTATS2011_CoatesNL11.pdf) (PDF). Int'l Conf. on AI
and Statistics (AISTATS). Archived from the original (http://machinelearning.wustl.edu/mlpaper
s/paper_files/AISTATS2011_CoatesNL11.pdf) (PDF) on 13 August 2017. Retrieved
25 November 2018.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 27/40
64. Csurka, Gabriella; Dance, Christopher C.; Fan, Lixin; Willamowski, Jutta; Bray, Cédric (2004).
Visual categorization with bags of keypoints (https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~efros/courses/LBMV07/
Papers/csurka-eccv-04.pdf) (PDF). ECCV Workshop on Statistical Learning in Computer
Vision. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190713040210/http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~efros/
courses/LBMV07/Papers/csurka-eccv-04.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2019.
Retrieved 29 August 2019.
65. Daniel Jurafsky; James H. Martin (2009). Speech and Language Processing. Pearson
Education International. pp. 145–146.
66. Lu, Haiping; Plataniotis, K.N.; Venetsanopoulos, A.N. (2011). "A Survey of Multilinear Subspace
Learning for Tensor Data" (http://www.dsp.utoronto.ca/~haiping/Publication/SurveyMSL_PR201
1.pdf) (PDF). Pattern Recognition. 44 (7): 1540–1551. Bibcode:2011PatRe..44.1540L (https://u
i.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011PatRe..44.1540L). doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2011.01.004 (https://doi.
org/10.1016%2Fj.patcog.2011.01.004). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2019071022542
9/http://www.dsp.utoronto.ca/~haiping/Publication/SurveyMSL_PR2011.pdf) (PDF) from the
original on 10 July 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2015.
67. Yoshua Bengio (2009). Learning Deep Architectures for AI (https://books.google.com/books?id
=cq5ewg7FniMC&pg=PA3). Now Publishers Inc. pp. 1–3. ISBN 978-1-60198-294-0. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20230117053339/https://books.google.com/books?id=cq5ewg7Fn
iMC&pg=PA3) from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2016.
68. Tillmann, A. M. (2015). "On the Computational Intractability of Exact and Approximate
Dictionary Learning". IEEE Signal Processing Letters. 22 (1): 45–49. arXiv:1405.6664 (https://a
rxiv.org/abs/1405.6664). Bibcode:2015ISPL...22...45T (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015I
SPL...22...45T). doi:10.1109/LSP.2014.2345761 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2FLSP.2014.234576
1). S2CID 13342762 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13342762).
69. Aharon, M, M Elad, and A Bruckstein. 2006. "K-SVD: An Algorithm for Designing Overcomplete
Dictionaries for Sparse Representation (http://sites.fas.harvard.edu/~cs278/papers/ksvd.pdf)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181123142158/http://sites.fas.harvard.edu/~cs278/pa
pers/ksvd.pdf) 2018-11-23 at the Wayback Machine." Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on
54 (11): 4311–4322
70. Zimek, Arthur; Schubert, Erich (2017), "Outlier Detection", Encyclopedia of Database Systems,
Springer New York, pp. 1–5, doi:10.1007/978-1-4899-7993-3_80719-1 (https://doi.org/10.100
7%2F978-1-4899-7993-3_80719-1), ISBN 978-1-4899-7993-3
71. Hodge, V. J.; Austin, J. (2004). "A Survey of Outlier Detection Methodologies" (http://eprints.whi
terose.ac.uk/767/1/hodgevj4.pdf) (PDF). Artificial Intelligence Review. 22 (2): 85–126.
CiteSeerX 10.1.1.318.4023 (https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.318.40
23). doi:10.1007/s10462-004-4304-y (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10462-004-4304-y).
S2CID 59941878 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:59941878). Archived (https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20150622042146/http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/767/1/hodgevj4.pdf) (PDF) from
the original on 22 June 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2018.
72. Dokas, Paul; Ertoz, Levent; Kumar, Vipin; Lazarevic, Aleksandar; Srivastava, Jaideep; Tan,
Pang-Ning (2002). "Data mining for network intrusion detection" (https://www-users.cse.umn.e
du/~lazar027/MINDS/papers/nsf_ngdm_2002.pdf) (PDF). Proceedings NSF Workshop on Next
Generation Data Mining. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20150923211542/http://www.cs
ee.umbc.edu/~kolari1/Mining/ngdm/dokas.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015.
Retrieved 26 March 2023.
73. Chandola, V.; Banerjee, A.; Kumar, V. (2009). "Anomaly detection: A survey". ACM Computing
Surveys. 41 (3): 1–58. doi:10.1145/1541880.1541882 (https://doi.org/10.1145%2F1541880.154
1882). S2CID 207172599 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:207172599).
74. Fleer, S.; Moringen, A.; Klatzky, R. L.; Ritter, H. (2020). "Learning efficient haptic shape
exploration with a rigid tactile sensor array, S. Fleer, A. Moringen, R. Klatzky, H. Ritter" (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6940144). PLOS ONE. 15 (1) e0226880.
arXiv:1902.07501 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.07501). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0226880 (http
s://doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0226880). PMC 6940144 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/p
mc/articles/PMC6940144). PMID 31896135 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31896135).
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 28/40
75. Moringen, Alexandra; Fleer, Sascha; Walck, Guillaume; Ritter, Helge (2020), Nisky, Ilana;
Hartcher-O'Brien, Jess; Wiertlewski, Michaël; Smeets, Jeroen (eds.), "Attention-Based Robot
Learning of Haptic Interaction", Haptics: Science, Technology, Applications, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 12272, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 462–470,
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-58147-3_51 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-3-030-58147-3_51),
ISBN 978-3-030-58146-6, S2CID 220069113 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:22006
9113)
76. Piatetsky-Shapiro, Gregory (1991), Discovery, analysis, and presentation of strong rules, in
Piatetsky-Shapiro, Gregory; and Frawley, William J.; eds., Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
AAAI/MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
77. Bassel, George W.; Glaab, Enrico; Marquez, Julietta; Holdsworth, Michael J.; Bacardit, Jaume
(1 September 2011). "Functional Network Construction in Arabidopsis Using Rule-Based
Machine Learning on Large-Scale Data Sets" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3
203449). The Plant Cell. 23 (9): 3101–3116. Bibcode:2011PlanC..23.3101B (https://ui.adsabs.h
arvard.edu/abs/2011PlanC..23.3101B). doi:10.1105/tpc.111.088153 (https://doi.org/10.1105%2
Ftpc.111.088153). ISSN 1532-298X (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1532-298X).
PMC 3203449 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3203449). PMID 21896882 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21896882).
78. Agrawal, R.; Imieliński, T.; Swami, A. (1993). "Mining association rules between sets of items in
large databases". Proceedings of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
Management of data - SIGMOD '93. p. 207. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.40.6984 (https://citeseerx.ist.ps
u.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.40.6984). doi:10.1145/170035.170072 (https://doi.org/10.
1145%2F170035.170072). ISBN 978-0-89791-592-2. S2CID 490415 (https://api.semanticschol
ar.org/CorpusID:490415).
79. Urbanowicz, Ryan J.; Moore, Jason H. (22 September 2009). "Learning Classifier Systems: A
Complete Introduction, Review, and Roadmap" (https://doi.org/10.1155%2F2009%2F736398).
Journal of Artificial Evolution and Applications. 2009: 1–25. doi:10.1155/2009/736398 (https://d
oi.org/10.1155%2F2009%2F736398). ISSN 1687-6229 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1687-6
229).
80. Plotkin G.D. Automatic Methods of Inductive Inference (https://www.era.lib.ed.ac.uk/bitstream/h
andle/1842/6656/Plotkin1972.pdf;sequence=1) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2017122
2051034/https://www.era.lib.ed.ac.uk/bitstream/handle/1842/6656/Plotkin1972.pdf;sequence=
1) 22 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine, PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1970.
81. Shapiro, Ehud Y. Inductive inference of theories from facts (http://ftp.cs.yale.edu/publications/te
chreports/tr192.pdf) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210821071609/http://ftp.cs.yale.e
du/publications/techreports/tr192.pdf) 21 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Research
Report 192, Yale University, Department of Computer Science, 1981. Reprinted in J.-L. Lassez,
G. Plotkin (Eds.), Computational Logic, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991, pp. 199–254.
82. Shapiro, Ehud Y. (1983). Algorithmic program debugging. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
ISBN 0-262-19218-7
83. Shapiro, Ehud Y. "The model inference system (http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1623364)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230406011006/https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=162
3364) 2023-04-06 at the Wayback Machine." Proceedings of the 7th international joint
conference on Artificial intelligence-Volume 2. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1981.
84. Burkov, Andriy (2019). The hundred-page machine learning book. Polen: Andriy Burkov.
ISBN 978-1-9995795-0-0.
85. Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2021). Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Pearson
series in artificial intelligence (Fourth ed.). Hoboken: Pearson. ISBN 978-0-13-461099-3.
86. Honglak Lee, Roger Grosse, Rajesh Ranganath, Andrew Y. Ng. "Convolutional Deep Belief
Networks for Scalable Unsupervised Learning of Hierarchical Representations (http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.149.802&rep=rep1&type=pdf) Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20171018182235/http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1
49.802&rep=rep1&type=pdf) 2017-10-18 at the Wayback Machine" Proceedings of the 26th
Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, 2009.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 29/40
87. "RandomForestRegressor" (https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensembl
e.RandomForestRegressor.html). scikit-learn. Retrieved 12 February 2025.
88. "What Is Random Forest? | IBM" (https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/random-forest).
www.ibm.com. 20 October 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2025.
89. Cortes, Corinna; Vapnik, Vladimir N. (1995). "Support-vector networks" (https://doi.org/10.100
7%2FBF00994018). Machine Learning. 20 (3): 273–297. doi:10.1007/BF00994018 (https://doi.
org/10.1007%2FBF00994018).
90. Stevenson, Christopher. "Tutorial: Polynomial Regression in Excel" (https://facultystaff.richmon
d.edu/~cstevens/301/Excel4.html). facultystaff.richmond.edu. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20130602200850/https://facultystaff.richmond.edu/~cstevens/301/Excel4.html) from the
original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2017.
91. Wanta, Damian; Smolik, Aleksander; Smolik, Waldemar T.; Midura, Mateusz; Wróblewski,
Przemysław (2025). "Image reconstruction using machine-learned pseudoinverse in electrical
capacitance tomography" (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.engappai.2024.109888). Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence. 142 109888. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109888 (https://
doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.engappai.2024.109888).
92. The documentation for scikit-learn also has similar examples (http://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto
_examples/gaussian_process/plot_compare_gpr_krr.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20221102184805/https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/gaussian_process/plot_comp
are_gpr_krr.html) 2 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine.
93. Goldberg, David E.; Holland, John H. (1988). "Genetic algorithms and machine learning" (http
s://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/46947/1/10994_2005_Article_422926.pdf) (PDF).
Machine Learning. 3 (2): 95–99. doi:10.1007/bf00113892 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fbf001138
92). S2CID 35506513 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:35506513). Archived (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20110516025803/http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/2027.42/46947/1/
10994_2005_Article_422926.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved
3 September 2019.
94. Michie, D.; Spiegelhalter, D. J.; Taylor, C. C. (1994). "Machine Learning, Neural and Statistical
Classification". Ellis Horwood Series in Artificial Intelligence. Bibcode:1994mlns.book.....M (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1994mlns.book.....M).
95. Zhang, Jun; Zhan, Zhi-hui; Lin, Ying; Chen, Ni; Gong, Yue-jiao; Zhong, Jing-hui; Chung, Henry
S.H.; Li, Yun; Shi, Yu-hui (2011). "Evolutionary Computation Meets Machine Learning: A
Survey". IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine. 6 (4): 68–75.
Bibcode:2011ICIM....6d..68Z (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2011ICIM....6d..68Z).
doi:10.1109/mci.2011.942584 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2Fmci.2011.942584). S2CID 6760276
(https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6760276).
96. Verbert, K.; Babuška, R.; De Schutter, B. (1 April 2017). "Bayesian and Dempster–Shafer
reasoning for knowledge-based fault diagnosis–A comparative study" (https://www.sciencedire
ct.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0952197617300118). Engineering Applications of Artificial
Intelligence. 60: 136–150. doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2017.01.011 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.en
gappai.2017.01.011). ISSN 0952-1976 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0952-1976).
97. Yoosefzadeh-Najafabadi, Mohsen; Hugh, Earl; Tulpan, Dan; Sulik, John; Eskandari, Milad
(2021). "Application of Machine Learning Algorithms in Plant Breeding: Predicting Yield From
Hyperspectral Reflectance in Soybean?" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC78356
36). Front. Plant Sci. 11 624273. Bibcode:2021FrPS...1124273Y (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.ed
u/abs/2021FrPS...1124273Y). doi:10.3389/fpls.2020.624273 (https://doi.org/10.3389%2Ffpls.2
020.624273). PMC 7835636 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7835636).
PMID 33510761 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33510761).
98. Urbanowicz, Ryan J.; Moore, Jason H. (22 September 2009). "Learning Classifier Systems: A
Complete Introduction, Review, and Roadmap" (https://doi.org/10.1155%2F2009%2F736398).
Journal of Artificial Evolution and Applications. 2009: 1–25. doi:10.1155/2009/736398 (https://d
oi.org/10.1155%2F2009%2F736398). ISSN 1687-6229 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1687-6
229).
99. Zhang, C. and Zhang, S., 2002. Association rule mining: models and algorithms (https://books.
google.com/books?id=VqSoCAAAQBAJ). Springer-Verlag.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 30/40
100. De Castro, Leandro Nunes, and Jonathan Timmis. Artificial immune systems: a new
computational intelligence approach (https://books.google.com/books?id=aMFP7p8DtaQC&q
=%22rule-based%22). Springer Science & Business Media, 2002.
101. "Federated Learning: Collaborative Machine Learning without Centralized Training Data" (htt
p://ai.googleblog.com/2017/04/federated-learning-collaborative.html). Google AI Blog. 6 April
2017. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190607054623/https://ai.googleblog.com/2017/
04/federated-learning-collaborative.html) from the original on 7 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June
2019.
102. Machine learning is included in the CFA Curriculum; see: [1] (https://www.cfainstitute.org/)
{{Webarchive|url=https://www.cfainstitute.org/
103. Marcos M. López de Prado (2010). Machine Learning for Asset Managers (https://www.cambri
dge.org/core/books/machine-learning-for-asset-managers/6D9211305EA2E425D33A9F38D0A
E3545). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108883658
104. Ivanenko, Mikhail; Smolik, Waldemar T.; Wanta, Damian; Midura, Mateusz; Wróblewski,
Przemysław; Hou, Xiaohan; Yan, Xiaoheng (2023). "Image Reconstruction Using Supervised
Learning in Wearable Electrical Impedance Tomography of the Thorax" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10538128). Sensors. 23 (18): 7774. Bibcode:2023Senso..23.7774I (htt
ps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023Senso..23.7774I). doi:10.3390/s23187774 (https://doi.org/
10.3390%2Fs23187774). PMC 10538128 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1053
8128). PMID 37765831 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37765831).
105. "BelKor Home Page" (https://web.archive.org/web/20151110062742/http://www2.research.att.c
om/~volinsky/netflix/) research.att.com
106. "The Netflix Tech Blog: Netflix Recommendations: Beyond the 5 stars (Part 1)" (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20160531002916/http://techblog.netflix.com/2012/04/netflix-recommendations-be
yond-5-stars.html). 6 April 2012. Archived from the original (http://techblog.netflix.com/2012/04/
netflix-recommendations-beyond-5-stars.html) on 31 May 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2015.
107. Scott Patterson (13 July 2010). "Letting the Machines Decide" (https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB
10001424052748703834604575365310813948080). The Wall Street Journal. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20180624151019/https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405274870
3834604575365310813948080) from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2018.
108. Vinod Khosla (10 January 2012). "Do We Need Doctors or Algorithms?" (https://techcrunch.co
m/2012/01/10/doctors-or-algorithms/). Tech Crunch. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201
80618175811/https://techcrunch.com/2012/01/10/doctors-or-algorithms/) from the original on
18 June 2018. Retrieved 20 October 2016.
109. When A Machine Learning Algorithm Studied Fine Art Paintings, It Saw Things Art Historians
Had Never Noticed (https://medium.com/the-physics-arxiv-blog/when-a-machine-learning-algor
ithm-studied-fine-art-paintings-it-saw-things-art-historians-had-never-b8e4e7bf7d3e) Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20160604072143/https://medium.com/the-physics-arxiv-blog/whe
n-a-machine-learning-algorithm-studied-fine-art-paintings-it-saw-things-art-historians-had-neve
r-b8e4e7bf7d3e) 4 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The Physics at ArXiv blog
110. Vincent, James (10 April 2019). "The first AI-generated textbook shows what robot writers are
actually good at" (https://www.theverge.com/2019/4/10/18304558/ai-writing-academic-research
-book-springer-nature-artificial-intelligence). The Verge. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
20190505200409/https://www.theverge.com/2019/4/10/18304558/ai-writing-academic-research
-book-springer-nature-artificial-intelligence) from the original on 5 May 2019. Retrieved 5 May
2019.
111. Vaishya, Raju; Javaid, Mohd; Khan, Ibrahim Haleem; Haleem, Abid (1 July 2020). "Artificial
Intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl
es/PMC7195043). Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews. 14 (4): 337–
339. doi:10.1016/j.dsx.2020.04.012 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.dsx.2020.04.012).
PMC 7195043 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7195043). PMID 32305024 (http
s://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32305024).
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 31/40
112. Rezapouraghdam, Hamed; Akhshik, Arash; Ramkissoon, Haywantee (10 March 2021).
"Application of machine learning to predict visitors' green behavior in marine protected areas:
evidence from Cyprus" (https://doi.org/10.1080%2F09669582.2021.1887878). Journal of
Sustainable Tourism. 31 (11): 2479–2505. doi:10.1080/09669582.2021.1887878 (https://doi.or
g/10.1080%2F09669582.2021.1887878). hdl:10037/24073 (https://hdl.handle.net/10037%2F2
4073).
113. Dey, Somdip; Singh, Amit Kumar; Wang, Xiaohang; McDonald-Maier, Klaus (15 June 2020).
"User Interaction Aware Reinforcement Learning for Power and Thermal Efficiency of CPUGPU Mobile MPSoCs" (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9116294). 2020 Design,
Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) (http://repository.essex.ac.uk/27
546/1/User%20Interaction%20Aware%20Reinforcement%20Learning.pdf) (PDF). pp. 1728–
1733. doi:10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9116294 (https://doi.org/10.23919%2FDATE48585.202
0.9116294). ISBN 978-3-9819263-4-7. S2CID 219858480 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/Corp
usID:219858480). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20211213192526/https://ieeexplore.ie
ee.org/document/9116294/) from the original on 13 December 2021. Retrieved 20 January
2022.
114. Quested, Tony. "Smartphones get smarter with Essex innovation" (https://www.businessweekly.
co.uk/news/academia-research/smartphones-get-smarter-essex-innovation). Business Weekly.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210624200126/https://www.businessweekly.co.uk/ne
ws/academia-research/smartphones-get-smarter-essex-innovation) from the original on 24
June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021.
115. Williams, Rhiannon (21 July 2020). "Future smartphones 'will prolong their own battery life by
monitoring owners' behaviour' " (https://inews.co.uk/news/technology/future-smartphones-prolo
ng-battery-life-monitoring-behaviour-558689). i. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2021062
4201153/https://inews.co.uk/news/technology/future-smartphones-prolong-battery-life-monitori
ng-behaviour-558689) from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021.
116. Rasekhschaffe, Keywan Christian; Jones, Robert C. (1 July 2019). "Machine Learning for
Stock Selection" (https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0015198X.2019.1596678).
Financial Analysts Journal. 75 (3): 70–88. doi:10.1080/0015198X.2019.1596678 (https://doi.or
g/10.1080%2F0015198X.2019.1596678). ISSN 0015-198X (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/00
15-198X). S2CID 108312507 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:108312507). Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20231126160605/https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00
15198X.2019.1596678) from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023.
117. Chung, Yunsie; Green, William H. (2024). "Machine learning from quantum chemistry to predict
experimental solvent effects on reaction rates" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC
10866337). Chemical Science. 15 (7): 2410–2424. doi:10.1039/D3SC05353A (https://doi.org/1
0.1039%2FD3SC05353A). ISSN 2041-6520 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2041-6520).
PMC 10866337 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10866337). PMID 38362410 (h
ttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38362410).
118. Sun, Yuran; Huang, Shih-Kai; Zhao, Xilei (1 February 2024). "Predicting Hurricane Evacuation
Decisions with Interpretable Machine Learning Methods" (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs13753-0
24-00541-1). International Journal of Disaster Risk Science. 15 (1): 134–148.
arXiv:2303.06557 (https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06557). Bibcode:2024IJDRS..15..134S (https://ui.
adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024IJDRS..15..134S). doi:10.1007/s13753-024-00541-1 (https://doi.
org/10.1007%2Fs13753-024-00541-1). ISSN 2192-6395 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2192
-6395).
119. Sun, Yuran; Zhao, Xilei; Lovreglio, Ruggiero; Kuligowski, Erica (1 January 2024), Naser, M. Z.
(ed.), "8 - AI for large-scale evacuation modeling: promises and challenges" (https://www.scien
cedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128240731000149), Interpretable Machine Learning for
the Analysis, Design, Assessment, and Informed Decision Making for Civil Infrastructure,
Woodhead Publishing Series in Civil and Structural Engineering, Woodhead Publishing,
pp. 185–204, ISBN 978-0-12-824073-1, archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2024051912154
7/https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780128240731000149) from the
original on 19 May 2024, retrieved 19 May 2024
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 32/40
120. Xu, Ningzhe; Lovreglio, Ruggiero; Kuligowski, Erica D.; Cova, Thomas J.; Nilsson, Daniel;
Zhao, Xilei (1 March 2023). "Predicting and Assessing Wildfire Evacuation Decision-Making
Using Machine Learning: Findings from the 2019 Kincade Fire". Fire Technology. 59 (2): 793–
825. doi:10.1007/s10694-023-01363-1 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs10694-023-01363-1).
ISSN 1572-8099 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1572-8099).
121. Wang, Ke; Shi, Xiupeng; Goh, Algena Pei Xuan; Qian, Shunzhi (1 June 2019). "A machine
learning based study on pedestrian movement dynamics under emergency evacuation" (http
s://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037971121830376X). Fire Safety Journal. 106:
163–176. Bibcode:2019FirSJ.106..163W (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019FirSJ.106..16
3W). doi:10.1016/j.firesaf.2019.04.008 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.firesaf.2019.04.008).
hdl:10356/143390 (https://hdl.handle.net/10356%2F143390). ISSN 0379-7112 (https://search.
worldcat.org/issn/0379-7112). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240519121539/https://w
ww.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S037971121830376X) from the original on 19 May
2024. Retrieved 19 May 2024.
122. Zhao, Xilei; Lovreglio, Ruggiero; Nilsson, Daniel (1 May 2020). "Modelling and interpreting preevacuation decision-making using machine learning" (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/a
rticle/pii/S0926580519313184). Automation in Construction. 113 103140.
doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2020.103140 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.autcon.2020.103140).
hdl:10179/17315 (https://hdl.handle.net/10179%2F17315). ISSN 0926-5805 (https://search.wor
ldcat.org/issn/0926-5805). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240519121548/https://ww
w.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0926580519313184) from the original on 19 May
2024. Retrieved 19 May 2024.
123. "Why Machine Learning Models Often Fail to Learn: QuickTake Q&A" (https://web.archive.org/
web/20170320225010/https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-10/why-machine-lear
ning-models-often-fail-to-learn-quicktake-q-a). Bloomberg.com. 10 November 2016. Archived
from the original (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-10/why-machine-learningmodels-often-fail-to-learn-quicktake-q-a) on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 10 April 2017.
124. "The First Wave of Corporate AI Is Doomed to Fail" (https://hbr.org/2017/04/the-first-wave-of-co
rporate-ai-is-doomed-to-fail). Harvard Business Review. 18 April 2017. Archived (https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20180821032004/https://hbr.org/2017/04/the-first-wave-of-corporate-ai-is-doome
d-to-fail) from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
125. "Why the A.I. euphoria is doomed to fail" (https://venturebeat.com/2016/09/17/why-the-a-i-euph
oria-is-doomed-to-fail/). VentureBeat. 18 September 2016. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20180819124138/https://venturebeat.com/2016/09/17/why-the-a-i-euphoria-is-doomed-to-fai
l/) from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
126. "9 Reasons why your machine learning project will fail" (https://www.kdnuggets.com/2018/07/w
hy-machine-learning-project-fail.html). www.kdnuggets.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20180821031802/https://www.kdnuggets.com/2018/07/why-machine-learning-project-fail.h
tml) from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
127. Babuta, Alexander; Oswald, Marion; Rinik, Christine (2018). Transparency and Intelligibility (htt
ps://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep37375.8) (Report). Royal United Services Institute (RUSI).
pp. 17–22. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20231209002929/https://www.jstor.org/stabl
e/resrep37375.8) from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023.
128. "Why Uber's self-driving car killed a pedestrian" (https://www.economist.com/the-economist-ex
plains/2018/05/29/why-ubers-self-driving-car-killed-a-pedestrian). The Economist. Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20180821031818/https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explain
s/2018/05/29/why-ubers-self-driving-car-killed-a-pedestrian) from the original on 21 August
2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
129. "IBM's Watson recommended 'unsafe and incorrect' cancer treatments – STAT" (https://www.st
atnews.com/2018/07/25/ibm-watson-recommended-unsafe-incorrect-treatments/). STAT. 25
July 2018. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180821062616/https://www.statnews.com/
2018/07/25/ibm-watson-recommended-unsafe-incorrect-treatments/) from the original on 21
August 2018. Retrieved 21 August 2018.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 33/40
130. Hernandez, Daniela; Greenwald, Ted (11 August 2018). "IBM Has a Watson Dilemma" (https://
www.wsj.com/articles/ibm-bet-billions-that-watson-could-improve-cancer-treatment-it-hasnt-wor
ked-1533961147). The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0
099-9660). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180821031906/https://www.wsj.com/article
s/ibm-bet-billions-that-watson-could-improve-cancer-treatment-it-hasnt-worked-1533961147)
from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 21 August 2018.
131. Allyn, Bobby (27 February 2023). "How Microsoft's experiment in artificial intelligence tech
backfired" (https://www.npr.org/2023/02/27/1159630243/how-microsofts-experiment-in-artificialintelligence-tech-backfired). National Public Radio. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2023
1208234056/https://www.npr.org/2023/02/27/1159630243/how-microsofts-experiment-in-artifici
al-intelligence-tech-backfired) from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December
2023.
132. Reddy, Shivani M.; Patel, Sheila; Weyrich, Meghan; Fenton, Joshua; Viswanathan, Meera
(2020). "Comparison of a traditional systematic review approach with review-of-reviews and
semi-automation as strategies to update the evidence" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articl
es/PMC7574591). Systematic Reviews. 9 (1): 243. doi:10.1186/s13643-020-01450-2 (https://d
oi.org/10.1186%2Fs13643-020-01450-2). ISSN 2046-4053 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/20
46-4053). PMC 7574591 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7574591).
PMID 33076975 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33076975).
133. Rudin, Cynthia (2019). "Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes
decisions and use interpretable models instead" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PM
C9122117). Nature Machine Intelligence. 1 (5): 206–215. doi:10.1038/s42256-019-0048-x (http
s://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs42256-019-0048-x). PMC 9122117 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC9122117). PMID 35603010 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35603010).
134. Hu, Tongxi; Zhang, Xuesong; Bohrer, Gil; Liu, Yanlan; Zhou, Yuyu; Martin, Jay; LI, Yang; Zhao,
Kaiguang (2023). "Crop yield prediction via explainable AI and interpretable machine learning:
Dangers of black box models for evaluating climate change impacts on crop yield" (https://doi.o
rg/10.1016%2Fj.agrformet.2023.109458). Agricultural and Forest Meteorology. 336 109458.
Bibcode:2023AgFM..33609458H (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2023AgFM..33609458H).
doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2023.109458 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.agrformet.2023.109458).
S2CID 258552400 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258552400).
135. Domingos 2015, Chapter 6, Chapter 7.
136. Domingos 2015, p. 286.
137. "Single pixel change fools AI programs" (https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-41845878).
BBC News. 3 November 2017. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180322011306/http://w
ww.bbc.com/news/technology-41845878) from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved
12 March 2018.
138. "AI Has a Hallucination Problem That's Proving Tough to Fix" (https://www.wired.com/story/ai-h
as-a-hallucination-problem-thats-proving-tough-to-fix/). WIRED. 2018. Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20180312024533/https://www.wired.com/story/ai-has-a-hallucination-problem-tha
ts-proving-tough-to-fix/) from the original on 12 March 2018. Retrieved 12 March 2018.
139. Madry, A.; Makelov, A.; Schmidt, L.; Tsipras, D.; Vladu, A. (4 September 2019). "Towards deep
learning models resistant to adversarial attacks". arXiv:1706.06083 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.
06083) [stat.ML (https://arxiv.org/archive/stat.ML)].
140. "Adversarial Machine Learning – CLTC UC Berkeley Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity" (http
s://cltc.berkeley.edu/aml/). CLTC. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220517045352/http
s://cltc.berkeley.edu/aml/) from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022.
141. "Machine-learning models vulnerable to undetectable backdoors" (https://www.theregister.com/
2022/04/21/machine_learning_models_backdoors/). The Register. Archived (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20220513171215/https://www.theregister.com/2022/04/21/machine_learning_model
s_backdoors/) from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022.
142. "Undetectable Backdoors Plantable In Any Machine-Learning Algorithm" (https://spectrum.ieee.
org/machine-learningbackdoor). IEEE Spectrum. 10 May 2022. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20220511152052/https://spectrum.ieee.org/machine-learningbackdoor) from the original
on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 34/40
143. Goldwasser, Shafi; Kim, Michael P.; Vaikuntanathan, Vinod; Zamir, Or (14 April 2022). "Planting
Undetectable Backdoors in Machine Learning Models". arXiv:2204.06974 (https://arxiv.org/abs/
2204.06974) [cs.LG (https://arxiv.org/archive/cs.LG)].
144. Kohavi, Ron (1995). "A Study of Cross-Validation and Bootstrap for Accuracy Estimation and
Model Selection" (https://ai.stanford.edu/~ronnyk/accEst.pdf) (PDF). International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180712102706/ht
tp://web.cs.iastate.edu/~jtian/cs573/Papers/Kohavi-IJCAI-95.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 12
July 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2023.
145. Catal, Cagatay (2012). "Performance Evaluation Metrics for Software Fault Prediction Studies"
(http://www.uni-obuda.hu/journal/Catal_36.pdf) (PDF). Acta Polytechnica Hungarica. 9 (4).
Retrieved 2 October 2016.
146. Müller, Vincent C. (30 April 2020). "Ethics of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics" (https://plato.st
anford.edu/entries/ethics-ai/). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20201010174108/https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-ai/) from the original on
10 October 2020.
147. Van Eyghen, Hans (2025). "AI Algorithms as (Un)virtuous Knowers" (https://doi.org/10.1007%2
Fs44163-024-00219-z). Discover Artificial Intelligence. 5 (2) 2. doi:10.1007/s44163-024-00219-
z (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs44163-024-00219-z).
148. Krištofík, Andrej (28 April 2025). "Bias in AI (Supported) Decision Making: Old Problems, New
Technologies" (https://iacajournal.org/articles/10.36745/ijca.598). International Journal for
Court Administration. 16 (1) 3. doi:10.36745/ijca.598 (https://doi.org/10.36745%2Fijca.598).
ISSN 2156-7964 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2156-7964).
149. "Assessing potential future artificial intelligence risks, benefits and policy imperatives" (https://w
ww.oecd.org/en/publications/assessing-potential-future-artificial-intelligence-risks-benefits-andpolicy-imperatives_3f4e3dfb-en.html). OECD. 14 November 2024. Retrieved 4 August 2025.
150. Garcia, Megan (2016). "Racist in the Machine". World Policy Journal. 33 (4): 111–117.
doi:10.1215/07402775-3813015 (https://doi.org/10.1215%2F07402775-3813015). ISSN 0740-
2775 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0740-2775). S2CID 151595343 (https://api.semanticsch
olar.org/CorpusID:151595343).
151. Bostrom, Nick (2011). "The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence" (https://web.archive.org/web/201603
04015020/http://www.nickbostrom.com/ethics/artificial-intelligence.pdf) (PDF). Archived from
the original (http://www.nickbostrom.com/ethics/artificial-intelligence.pdf) (PDF) on 4 March
2016. Retrieved 11 April 2016.
152. Edionwe, Tolulope. "The fight against racist algorithms" (https://theoutline.com/post/1571/the-fi
ght-against-racist-algorithms). The Outline. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2017111717
4504/https://theoutline.com/post/1571/the-fight-against-racist-algorithms) from the original on
17 November 2017. Retrieved 17 November 2017.
153. Jeffries, Adrianne. "Machine learning is racist because the internet is racist" (https://theoutline.c
om/post/1439/machine-learning-is-racist-because-the-internet-is-racist). The Outline. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20171117174503/https://theoutline.com/post/1439/machine-learni
ng-is-racist-because-the-internet-is-racist) from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved
17 November 2017.
154. Silva, Selena; Kenney, Martin (2018). "Algorithms, Platforms, and Ethnic Bias: An Integrative
Essay" (https://brie.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/brie_wp_2018-3.pdf) (PDF). Phylon. 55 (1 &
2): 9–37. ISSN 0031-8906 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0031-8906). JSTOR 26545017 (htt
ps://www.jstor.org/stable/26545017). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20240127200319/h
ttps://brie.berkeley.edu/sites/default/files/brie_wp_2018-3.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 27
January 2024.
155. Wong, Carissa (30 March 2023). "AI 'fairness' research held back by lack of diversity" (https://w
ww.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-00935-z). Nature. doi:10.1038/d41586-023-00935-z (http
s://doi.org/10.1038%2Fd41586-023-00935-z). PMID 36997714 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/36997714). S2CID 257857012 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257857012).
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20230412120505/https://www.nature.com/articles/d4158
6-023-00935-z) from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 35/40
156. Zhang, Jack Clark. "Artificial Intelligence Index Report 2021" (https://web.archive.org/web/2024
0519121545/https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/2021-AI-Index-Report_M
aster.pdf) (PDF). Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. Archived from the
original (https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/2021-AI-Index-Report_Maste
r.pdf) (PDF) on 19 May 2024. Retrieved 9 December 2023.
157. Caliskan, Aylin; Bryson, Joanna J.; Narayanan, Arvind (14 April 2017). "Semantics derived
automatically from language corpora contain human-like biases". Science. 356 (6334): 183–
186. arXiv:1608.07187 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.07187). Bibcode:2017Sci...356..183C (http
s://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2017Sci...356..183C). doi:10.1126/science.aal4230 (https://doi.o
rg/10.1126%2Fscience.aal4230). ISSN 0036-8075 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0036-807
5). PMID 28408601 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28408601). S2CID 23163324 (https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:23163324).
158. Wang, Xinan; Dasgupta, Sanjoy (2016), Lee, D. D.; Sugiyama, M.; Luxburg, U. V.; Guyon, I.
(eds.), "An algorithm for L1 nearest neighbor search via monotonic embedding" (http://papers.n
ips.cc/paper/6227-an-algorithm-for-l1-nearest-neighbor-search-via-monotonic-embedding.pdf)
(PDF), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc.,
pp. 983–991, archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170407051313/http://papers.nips.cc/pap
er/6227-an-algorithm-for-l1-nearest-neighbor-search-via-monotonic-embedding.pdf) (PDF)
from the original on 7 April 2017, retrieved 20 August 2018
159. M.O.R. Prates; P.H.C. Avelar; L.C. Lamb (11 March 2019). "Assessing Gender Bias in Machine
Translation – A Case Study with Google Translate". arXiv:1809.02208 (https://arxiv.org/abs/180
9.02208) [cs.CY (https://arxiv.org/archive/cs.CY)].
160. Narayanan, Arvind (24 August 2016). "Language necessarily contains human biases, and so
will machines trained on language corpora" (https://freedom-to-tinker.com/2016/08/24/languag
e-necessarily-contains-human-biases-and-so-will-machines-trained-on-language-corpora/).
Freedom to Tinker. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180625021555/https://freedom-to-t
inker.com/2016/08/24/language-necessarily-contains-human-biases-and-so-will-machines-train
ed-on-language-corpora/) from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2016.
161. Metz, Rachel (24 March 2016). "Why Microsoft Accidentally Unleashed a Neo-Nazi Sexbot" (htt
ps://www.technologyreview.com/s/601111/why-microsoft-accidentally-unleashed-a-neo-nazi-se
xbot/). MIT Technology Review. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181109023754/https://
www.technologyreview.com/s/601111/why-microsoft-accidentally-unleashed-a-neo-nazi-sexbo
t/) from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
162. Vincent, James (12 January 2018). "Google 'fixed' its racist algorithm by removing gorillas from
its image-labeling tech" (https://www.theverge.com/2018/1/12/16882408/google-racist-gorillasphoto-recognition-algorithm-ai). The Verge. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018082103
1830/https://www.theverge.com/2018/1/12/16882408/google-racist-gorillas-photo-recognition-al
gorithm-ai) from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
163. Crawford, Kate (25 June 2016). "Opinion | Artificial Intelligence's White Guy Problem" (https://w
ww.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligences-white-guy-problem.html).
New York Times. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210114220619/https://www.nytimes.
com/2016/06/26/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligences-white-guy-problem.html) from the
original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
164. Simonite, Tom (30 March 2017). "Microsoft: AI Isn't Yet Adaptable Enough to Help Businesses"
(https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603944/microsoft-ai-isnt-yet-adaptable-enough-to-help-b
usinesses/). MIT Technology Review. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20181109022820/
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603944/microsoft-ai-isnt-yet-adaptable-enough-to-help-bu
sinesses/) from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 20 August 2018.
165. Hempel, Jessi (13 November 2018). "Fei-Fei Li's Quest to Make Machines Better for Humanity"
(https://www.wired.com/story/fei-fei-li-artificial-intelligence-humanity/). Wired. ISSN 1059-1028
(https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1059-1028). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/202012140
95220/https://www.wired.com/story/fei-fei-li-artificial-intelligence-humanity/) from the original on
14 December 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2019.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 36/40
166. Char, D. S.; Shah, N. H.; Magnus, D. (2018). "Implementing Machine Learning in Health Care
—Addressing Ethical Challenges" (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5962261).
New England Journal of Medicine. 378 (11): 981–983. doi:10.1056/nejmp1714229 (https://doi.o
rg/10.1056%2Fnejmp1714229). PMC 5962261 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC
5962261). PMID 29539284 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29539284).
167. Research, AI (23 October 2015). "Deep Neural Networks for Acoustic Modeling in Speech
Recognition" (http://airesearch.com/ai-research-papers/deep-neural-networks-for-acoustic-mod
eling-in-speech-recognition/). airesearch.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160201
033801/http://airesearch.com/ai-research-papers/deep-neural-networks-for-acoustic-modeling-i
n-speech-recognition/) from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
168. "GPUs Continue to Dominate the AI Accelerator Market for Now" (https://www.informationweek.
com/big-data/ai-machine-learning/gpus-continue-to-dominate-the-ai-accelerator-market-for-no
w/a/d-id/1336475). InformationWeek. December 2019. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0200610094310/https://www.informationweek.com/big-data/ai-machine-learning/gpus-continue
-to-dominate-the-ai-accelerator-market-for-now/a/d-id/1336475) from the original on 10 June
2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020.
169. Ray, Tiernan (2019). "AI is changing the entire nature of compute" (https://www.zdnet.com/artic
le/ai-is-changing-the-entire-nature-of-compute/). ZDNet. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
20200525144635/https://www.zdnet.com/article/ai-is-changing-the-entire-nature-of-compute/)
from the original on 25 May 2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020.
170. "AI and compute" (https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/). OpenAI. 16 May 2018. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20200617200602/https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/) from
the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 11 June 2020.
171. Jouppi, Norman P.; Young, Cliff; Patil, Nishant; Patterson, David; Agrawal, Gaurav; Bajwa,
Raminder; Bates, Sarah; Bhatia, Suresh; Boden, Nan; Borchers, Al; Boyle, Rick; Cantin,
Pierre-luc; Chao, Clifford; Clark, Chris; Coriell, Jeremy (24 June 2017). "In-Datacenter
Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing Unit" (https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3079856.30
80246). Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture.
ISCA '17. New York, NY, US: Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 1–12.
arXiv:1704.04760 (https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04760). doi:10.1145/3079856.3080246 (https://do
i.org/10.1145%2F3079856.3080246). ISBN 978-1-4503-4892-8.
172. Best, Jo (8 December 2020). "What is neuromorphic computing? Everything you need to know
about how it is changing the future of computing" (https://www.zdnet.com/article/what-is-neuro
morphic-computing-everything-you-need-to-know-about-how-it-will-change-the-future-of-compu
ting/). ZDNET. Retrieved 21 November 2024.
173. Hecate He (27 May 2021). Michael Sarazen; Chain Zhang (eds.). "Cornell & NTT's Physical
Neural Networks: A "Radical Alternative for Implementing Deep Neural Networks" That Enables
Arbitrary Physical Systems Training" (https://syncedreview.com/2021/05/27/deepmind-podrace
r-tpu-based-rl-frameworks-deliver-exceptional-performance-at-low-cost-28/). Synced. Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20211027183428/https://syncedreview.com/2021/05/27/deepmind
-podracer-tpu-based-rl-frameworks-deliver-exceptional-performance-at-low-cost-28/) from the
original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2021.
174. Clark, Lindsay (5 October 2021). "Nano-spaghetti to solve neural network power consumption"
(https://www.theregister.com/2021/10/05/analogue_neural_network_research/). The Register.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20211006150057/https://www.theregister.com/2021/10/0
5/analogue_neural_network_research/) from the original on 6 October 2021. Retrieved
12 October 2021.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 37/40
175. Fafoutis, Xenofon; Marchegiani, Letizia; Elsts, Atis; Pope, James; Piechocki, Robert; Craddock,
Ian (7 May 2018). "Extending the battery lifetime of wearable sensors with embedded machine
learning" (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8355116). 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum on
Internet of Things (WF-IoT) (https://research-information.bris.ac.uk/en/publications/b8fdb58b-7
114-45c6-82e4-4ab239c1327f). pp. 269–274. doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2018.8355116 (https://doi.or
g/10.1109%2FWF-IoT.2018.8355116). hdl:1983/b8fdb58b-7114-45c6-82e4-4ab239c1327f (http
s://hdl.handle.net/1983%2Fb8fdb58b-7114-45c6-82e4-4ab239c1327f). ISBN 978-1-4673-9944-
9. S2CID 19192912 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:19192912). Archived (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20220118182543/https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8355116?ca
sa_token=LCpUeGLS1e8AAAAA:2OjuJfNwZBnV2pgDxfnEAC-jbrETv_BpTcX35_aFqN6IULFx
u1xbYbVSRpD-zMd4GCUMELyG) from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January
2022.
176. "A Beginner's Guide To Machine learning For Embedded Systems" (https://analyticsindiamag.c
om/a-beginners-guide-to-machine-learning-for-embedded-systems/). Analytics India Magazine.
2 June 2021. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220118182754/https://analyticsindiama
g.com/a-beginners-guide-to-machine-learning-for-embedded-systems/) from the original on 18
January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
177. Synced (12 January 2022). "Google, Purdue & Harvard U's Open-Source Framework for
TinyML Achieves up to 75x Speedups on FPGAs | Synced" (https://syncedreview.com/2022/01/
12/deepmind-podracer-tpu-based-rl-frameworks-deliver-exceptional-performance-at-low-cost-1
83/). syncedreview.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220118182404/https://synced
review.com/2022/01/12/deepmind-podracer-tpu-based-rl-frameworks-deliver-exceptional-perfor
mance-at-low-cost-183/) from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
178. AlSelek, Mohammad; Alcaraz-Calero, Jose M.; Wang, Qi (2024). "Dynamic AI-IoT: Enabling
Updatable AI Models in Ultralow-Power 5G IoT Devices" (https://research-portal.uws.ac.uk/en/
publications/c8edfe21-77d0-4c3e-a8bc-d384faf605a0). IEEE Internet of Things Journal. 11 (8):
14192–14205. Bibcode:2024IITJ...1114192A (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024IITJ...111
4192A). doi:10.1109/JIOT.2023.3340858 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2FJIOT.2023.3340858).
179. Giri, Davide; Chiu, Kuan-Lin; Di Guglielmo, Giuseppe; Mantovani, Paolo; Carloni, Luca P. (15
June 2020). "ESP4ML: Platform-Based Design of Systems-on-Chip for Embedded Machine
Learning" (https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9116317). 2020 Design, Automation & Test in
Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE). pp. 1049–1054. arXiv:2004.03640 (https://arxiv.org/a
bs/2004.03640). doi:10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9116317 (https://doi.org/10.23919%2FDATE4
8585.2020.9116317). ISBN 978-3-9819263-4-7. S2CID 210928161 (https://api.semanticschola
r.org/CorpusID:210928161). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220118182342/https://iee
explore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9116317?casa_token=5I_Tmgrrbu4AAAAA:v7pDHPEWlR
uo2Vk3pU06194PO0-W21UOdyZqADrZxrRdPBZDMLwQrjJSAHUhHtzJmLu_VdgW) from the
original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
180. Louis, Marcia Sahaya; Azad, Zahra; Delshadtehrani, Leila; Gupta, Suyog; Warden, Pete;
Reddi, Vijay Janapa; Joshi, Ajay (2019). "Towards Deep Learning using TensorFlow Lite on
RISC-V" (https://edge.seas.harvard.edu/publications/towards-deep-learning-using-tensorflow-lit
e-risc-v). Harvard University. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20220117031909/https://ed
ge.seas.harvard.edu/publications/towards-deep-learning-using-tensorflow-lite-risc-v) from the
original on 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
181. Ibrahim, Ali; Osta, Mario; Alameh, Mohamad; Saleh, Moustafa; Chible, Hussein; Valle, Maurizio
(21 January 2019). "Approximate Computing Methods for Embedded Machine Learning". 2018
25th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS). pp. 845–
848. doi:10.1109/ICECS.2018.8617877 (https://doi.org/10.1109%2FICECS.2018.8617877).
ISBN 978-1-5386-9562-3. S2CID 58670712 (https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:586707
12).
182. "dblp: TensorFlow Eager: A Multi-Stage, Python-Embedded DSL for Machine Learning" (https://
dblp.org/rec/journals/corr/abs-1903-01855.html). dblp.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20220118182335/https://dblp.org/rec/journals/corr/abs-1903-01855.html) from the original on
18 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022.
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 38/40
183. Branco, Sérgio; Ferreira, André G.; Cabral, Jorge (5 November 2019). "Machine Learning in
Resource-Scarce Embedded Systems, FPGAs, and End-Devices: A Survey" (https://doi.org/1
0.3390%2Felectronics8111289). Electronics. 8 (11): 1289. doi:10.3390/electronics8111289 (htt
ps://doi.org/10.3390%2Felectronics8111289). hdl:1822/62521 (https://hdl.handle.net/1822%2F
62521). ISSN 2079-9292 (https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2079-9292).
Domingos, Pedro (22 September 2015). The Master Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate
Learning Machine Will Remake Our World. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-06570-7.
Nilsson, Nils (1998). Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis (https://archive.org/details/artificiali
ntell0000nils). Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN 978-1-55860-467-4. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20200726131654/https://archive.org/details/artificialintell0000nils) from the original on 26
July 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2019.
Poole, David; Mackworth, Alan; Goebel, Randy (1998). Computational Intelligence: A Logical
Approach (https://archive.org/details/computationalint00pool). New York: Oxford University
Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510270-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20200726131436/http
s://archive.org/details/computationalint00pool) from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved
22 August 2020.
Russell, Stuart J.; Norvig, Peter (2003), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (http://aima.c
s.berkeley.edu/) (2nd ed.), Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-790395-
2.
Alpaydin, Ethem (2020). Introduction to Machine Learning, (4th edition) MIT Press,
ISBN 9780262043793.
Bishop, Christopher (1995). Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0-19-853864-2.
Bishop, Christopher (2006) Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. ISBN 978-0-
387-31073-2
Domingos, Pedro (September 2015), The Master Algorithm, Basic Books, ISBN 978-0-465-
06570-7
Duda, Richard O.; Hart, Peter E.; Stork, David G. (2001) Pattern classification (2nd edition),
Wiley, New York, ISBN 0-471-05669-3.
Hastie, Trevor; Tibshirani, Robert & Friedman, Jerome H. (2009) The Elements of Statistical
Learning, Springer. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-0-387-848
58-7) ISBN 0-387-95284-5.
MacKay, David J. C. Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-521-64298-1
Murphy, Kevin P. (2021). Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction (https://probml.github.
io/pml-book/book1.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20210411153246/https://probm
l.github.io/pml-book/book1.html) 11 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine, MIT Press.
Nilsson, Nils J. (2015) Introduction to Machine Learning (https://ai.stanford.edu/people/nilsson/
mlbook.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190816182600/http://ai.stanford.edu/peo
ple/nilsson/mlbook.html) 16 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine.
Russell, Stuart & Norvig, Peter (2020). Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach. (4th edition)
Pearson, ISBN 978-0134610993.
Solomonoff, Ray, (1956) An Inductive Inference Machine (http://world.std.com/~rjs/indinf56.pdf)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110426161749/http://world.std.com/~rjs/indinf56.pdf)
26 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine A privately circulated report from the 1956 Dartmouth
Summer Research Conference on AI.
Sources
Further reading
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 39/40
Witten, Ian H. & Frank, Eibe (2011). Data Mining: Practical machine learning tools and
techniques (https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780123748560) Morgan Kaufmann, 664pp.,
ISBN 978-0-12-374856-0.
International Machine Learning Society (https://web.archive.org/web/20171230081341/http://m
achinelearning.org/)
mloss (https://mloss.org/) is an academic database of open-source machine learning software.
]
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Machine_learning&oldid=1322007358"
External links
15/11/2025, 16:01 Machine learning - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning 40/40